 Pearl Harbor. Posted on December 11, 2025 by Henry Curtis Hawaiian Electric Industries (HEI) and the Hawaiian Electric Companies
(HECO) have many links to the military. 

   

 Two retired 4-star Navy admirals who commanded the U.S.
Pacific Fleet and Pacific Command/Indo-Pacific Command play a role in managing
Hawaiian Electric. Admiral Thomas B. Fargo has served on the HEI board since
2005 and as Chair since 2020. Admiral John Aquilino was appointed to Hawaiian
Electric board in August 2025. 

   

 The Department of the Navy, on behalf of the Department of
Defense, intervened in Public Utilities Commission dockets addressing Kauai
Island Utility Cooperates acquisition of the Kauai grid, the proposed NextEra
acquisition of the Hawaiian Electric Companies, and KIUC and HECO rate cases. 

   

 The Marine Corps Base Hawaii on Mokapu Peninsula near
Kaneohe, Oahu was named as a potential landing site for the proposed Big Wind
project that would have powered Oahu with wind turbines on Lana`i and Moloka`i,
and for the proposed Aukahi Energy Floating Offshore Wind project sponsored by
Progression Energy and EDF Renewables North America. 

   

 Two recent Public Utilities Commission dockets involved
HECO and the military. HECO`s acquisition of the U.S. Army`s Oahu Electric
Distribution Systems in 2019-20, docket no. 2019-0349; and HECO contract with
the Defense Information Systems Agency for leasing dark fiber in 2021-23,
docket no.  2021-0186. 

   

 Army Privatization Project 

   

 The Army has been privatizing its utility systems on bases
nationwide pursuant to federal legislation designed to help the military
focus on its core mission of national defense. HECO won a competitive bid for a
50-year contract to provide the electrical distribution system for the U.S.
Army Garrison-Hawaii (USAG-HI). 

   

 The 12 installations on Oahu are: Schofield Barracks - Main
Post, Wheeler Arm¥ Airfield, Schofield Barracks - East Range, Pililaau Arm¥
Recreation Center, Fort Shafter, Tripler Arm¥ Medical Center, Fort DeRussy,
Helemano Military Reservation, Kahuku Training: Area, Dillineham Military
Reservation, Aliamanu Military Reservation, and Makua Valley Training Area. 

   

 As of 2015, USAG-HI supported nearly 100,000 former and
current soldiers, civilians and family members Statewide. 

   

 HECO agreed to acquire Army Distribution Systems for a
purchase price of $16,298,000. HECO will also make investments totaling
approximately $24.4 million over the first five years of the Contract to
correct existing system deficiencies. 

   

 Over the 50-year term of the Contract, HECO estimated that
it will invest an additional $213 million for renewals and replacements of the
underlying assets. HECO affirms that these expenditures will be reimbursed by
the Army over time through fees paid under the Contract. 

   

 The Commission approved the contract. HECO seeks to commit
an estimated $237.4 million in capital costs for the Army Privatization
Project. HECO shall not be permitted to recover any costs associated with
pre-existing environmental conditions from other ratepayers. HECO shall not be
permitted to recover costs from general ratepayers that are deemed
unrecoverable from the Army. 

   

 Dark Fiber 

   

 HECO developed its first set of fiber installation
standards: standard count fiber for all-dielectric self-supporting (ADSS)
installation in 2014. 

   

 Prior to 2014, there were no standard cable sizes, but
60-strand fiber was commonly installed. In the docket HECO asserted that it was
assessing the need to amend its “ current guidelines and practices to
increase the standard ADSS fiber to 144-strand or 288 strand, given the focus
on broadband equity and access, especially as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
and the need for all Hawai'i residents and visitors to have access to
high-speed internet in all parts of our state.” 

   

 It is cheaper to install excessive fiber rather than
incrementally add new fiber as it is needed. HECO considered leasing its excess
fiber. 

   

 HECO defined "dark fiber" as "an unused
strand or strands of optical fiber within a unit (bundle) of optical fibers
installed for communication needs.” 

   

 HECO`s Information Technology Network Operations Center
(NOC) was established in 2018 “to guard against cyber security threats and
maintain network availability.” 

   

 The military wanted use of fiber not associated with public
communication networks. HECO provided middle-mile fiber to provide
communication links between military bases. 

   

 HECO signed a proposed contract and service level agreement
with Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) and filed the application with
the Commission requesting authorization to lease existing optical fiber cable
assets in Honolulu to DISA, a combat support agency within the Department of
Defense. 

   

 HECO and DISA would both have access to the physical
demarcation points at each end of the leased fiber route. Neither entity would
be allowed access to the other entities network. 

   

 DISA will install its fiber optic infrastructure on its
side of any on its side of any demarcation points, and then HECO will conduct
tests to "ensure fiber quality and that the entire fiber route is
operational. 

   

 The contract was federally labeled as " Controlled
Unclassified Information " (CUI). This is perhaps the only Commission
proceeding where key documents were classified at the highest of the seven
levels of access to documents: (1) no one, (2) only the Commission, (3)
Commission and Consumer Advocate, (4) Commission and Consumer Advocate and
non-competitors to the applicant, (5) all parties, (6) everyone although the
information is very hard to find, and (7) easily accessible by everyone. 

   

 The Commission approved the contract. 

   

 “As a preliminary matter, the Commission finds that this
docket has a unique posture due to the sensitive nature of the information
involved. DISA's status as a combat support agency under the DOD means that
protection of its CUI is a matter of national security, and the Commission
acknowledges that disclosure of CUI -- even to the Commission-- could hinder
national security national security, and potentially breach certain federal
regulations.” 

   

   

 HECO shall file an annual status report that includes
whether “HECO's cybersecurity efforts and expenses increased as a direct
result of this arrangement and. if so, what is the associated increase in costs
and whether the military payments offset any such any increases.” 

   

 # 
    #      # 