A"/ .\ '.;:.

LINDA LINGLE
Governor

~$O~~
1J'~]"...
.- ----'-? .,-~

~I
l

-

.--

.~

SANDRA LEE KUNIMOTO
Chairperson, Board of Agriculture

§

DUANE K. OKAMOTO
Deputy to the Chairperson
State of Hawaii
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
1428 South King Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512

TESTIMONY OF SANDRA LEE KUNIMOTO
CHAIRPERSON, BOARD OF AGRICULTURE
BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEES ON WATER, LAND, OCEAN RESOURCES
AND HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS, AND AGRICULTURE
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 2008
9:00 a.m.
Room 325
HOUSE BILL 2502, HOUSE DRAFT 1
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Chairpersons Ito and Tsuji and Members of the Committees:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on House Bill No. 2502, House Draft 1
that proposes to designate solar energy facilities as a permissible use in the Agricultural
District on Land Study Bureau "D" and "E" rated agricultural land. The Department of
Agriculture supports the intent of this bill and offers an amendment. The development
of renewable energy resources in the Agricultural District should have relationship to an
agricultural use and/or should not adversely impact other agricultural uses in the vicinity.
House Draft 1 limits the footprint of the solar energy facility on a parcel to ten acres or
one percent of the land area, whichever is less. This provision makes it less likely that
the area of a parcel to be developed as a solar energy facility will become the primary
use on productive agricultural lands that happen to have "D" or "E" ratings. To ensure
solar energy facilities do not adversely affect agricultural uses and activities, the
Department recommends the following amendment (in bold print):

(page 6)

(6)

Solar energy facilities; provided that this paragraph shall
apply only to land:

HB2502, H.D. 1
Page 2

(A)

With soil classified by the land study bureau's
detailed land classification as overall (master)
productivity rating class D or E;

(B)

Where the total acreage to be used by the solar energy
facility is ten acres or one per cent of the parcel,
whichever is less;

(C)

Where the solar energy facility is compatible with
agricultural uses and activities on the parcel and
adjacent parcels;

+Gr (D)

That is located in the vicinity of an existing

electrical transmission and distribution system; and
~

(E)

That can generate between:

ill

Eight and fourteen kWh!m2!day (hours per day when
array is providing peak output) based on solar
insolation maps on a two-axis tracking flat
plate; or

(ii)

Five and fourteen kWh!m2!day (hours per day when
concentrator is providing peak output) based on
solar insolation maps on a two-axis tracking
concentrator system.

FEDERATION

2343 Rose Street, Honolulu, HI 96819
PH: (808)848-2074; Fax: (808) 848-1921

February 20, 2008
HEARING BEFORE THE
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON WATER, LAND,
OCEAN RESOURCES & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS
AND HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
TESTIMONY ON
HB 2502, HD 1
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Chair Ito and Tsuji and committee members:
My name is Alan Takemoto, Executive Director, of the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation,
which is the largest non-profit general agriculture organization representing approximately
1,600 farm and ranch family members statewide.
The Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation (HFBF) does not support HB 2502, HD 1, which
makes solar energy facilities a permitted use in the agricultural district on class D or E
land.
We are concerned how these non-agricultural uses will impact existing small farm
operations who occupy lands that are not considered prime agricultural lands, but unique
and important to those that can make these lands productive. Areas such as the Kona
coffee belt may not have deep rich soil, but have other soil and environmental qualities
that is prime for growing coffee.
While we all support renewable energy activities like solar and wind mills, we need to be
cognizant of how it will interface with existing and future agricultural uses that may have to
compete for all agricultural lands and resources statewide. We would prefer that the
existing land use process remain in place to further ensure that it does not negatively
impact our farmers.
Thank you.

II.

Hawaiif,lrll !.fl~~.!ll'l!
"-i

f -

<,

~

,

•

'A

Maui County Farm Bureau
An Affiliate of the American Fann Bureau Federation and Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation

Serving Maui's Fanners and Ranchers

TESTIMONY
HB2502HDI
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY
HEARING BEFORE THE
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON WATER, LAND, OCEAN RESOURCES & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS
AND COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

Chair Ito, Tsuji and Committee Members:
My name is Warren Watanabe, Executive Director of the Maui County Farm Bureau, a non-profit
general agriculture organization and an affiliate of the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation.
Maui County Farm Bureau, on behalf of its member farmers, ranchers and agricultural organizations
continues to have strong concerns about HB 2502 HDI as amended defining solar energy facilities
as a permissible use on agricultural district lands defined as class D or E. We oppose this measure

in its' current format.
The committee report states that the intent of the amendments was to recognize legitimate agricultural
activity on these lands. As an agricultural organization, we believe that this can only be accomplished
when a non-ag activity is recognized as accessory and secondary to the agricultural activity. Allowing
non-agricultural activity on agricultural lands make these lands prime picking for these other uses.
These uses are able to pass on their costs to customers. Subsequently, they will be willing to pay a
higher price for the lands than farmers or ranchers. Some of Hawaii's small farmers and ranchers
occupy lands classified as D and E. They have been identified as unique, such as in the coffee region
of Kona to recognize other environmental factors that make the lands valuable for agricultural
production. How will legitimate farmers and ranchers compete for these lands? What will happen to
their property taxes? They are already being challenged by "lifestyle farmers". We do not need
another category of challenges.
We recognize and support the importance of solar energy in Hawaii's future and that it does provide
significant opportunities for our ranchers. There may be lands that should be designated for renewable
energy use. Then, they should be classified as such. Rural may be an appropriate designation. We
should not create another non-ag permissible use category under agriculture.
We respectfully request further clarification of use of these agricultural lands for renewable energy
facilities unrelated to the agricultural operation. A caveat regarding agricultural impact should be
included. There are many lands that can be reclassified for renewable energy production. By
P.O. Box 148
Kula, HI 96790

ph: 8082819718
email:mauicountyfb@hotmail.com

recognizing these uses as permissible uses, we assume benefits such as reduced property tax rates
would be afforded to these companies. Is this the intent of reduced property taxes on agricultural
lands? We strongly believe that wind farms (existing), solar and all other renewable energy facilities
not associated with agriculture be reguired to take into account impacts on adjacent agricultural
operations and if they are not agriculture. be rezoned into another land use classification. Energy
facilities have a greater ability to pass on costs and other financial advantages not provided to
agriculture - this makes it important that benefits meant for agriculture stay only with agriculture.
HB2503 also heard during this meeting, recognizes the complementary alternative uses of these lands.
HB2503 recognizes the role of agriculture in the expansion of renewable energy, while preserving the
intent of agricultural lands. As Hawaii embarks on increasing its energy self sufficiency, we strongly
feel that it is timely that the land use classifications be clarified. Adding non-agricultural uses into the
agricultural district is not in the interest of Hawaii.
We respectfully request amendments of this bill to:
1) Clarify that renewable energy facilities, secondary and accessory to a farming or ranching
operation is allowed - similar to that done for biofuels during the last session.
2) Provide a streamlined reclassification process for renewable energy facilities on Class C,D and
E lands if they are independent of agricultural operations. Impacts of these facilities on
existing agricultural operations should be considered.
3) Expand definition to include all renewable energy .. .it seems a waste of resources to do this for
each individual type of renewable energy production.
Farm Bureau supports efforts to expand renewable energy operations in Hawaii. However, just as
energy is needed, a strong agricultural industry is also needed. We ask that both uses be balanced as
we move forward. Thank you for this opportunity to provide our comments on this important matter.

P.O. Box 148
Kula, HI 96790

ph: 8082819718
email:mauicountyfb@hotmail.com

98085454369

CHAMBERS OF COMM

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF HAWAII

10:59:16am

02-19-2008

1 /2

Cl

The Chamber of
Commerce of Hawaii
Since 7850

TESTIMONY TO THE HOUSE COMMITTEES ON WATER, LAND, OCEAN RESOURCES
& HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS &AGRICULTURE
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 2008 AT 9:00 A.M.
ROOM 325, STATE CAPITOL
RE: H.B. 2502 Relating to Solar Energy
Chairs Ito and Tsuji, Vice Chairs Karamatsu and Brower, Members of the Committees:
My name is Christine H. H. Camp, Chair of the Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii, Land Use and Transportation
Committee. The Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii strongly supports H.B. 2502 HD1 as originally drafted.
The Chamber is the largest business organization in Hawaii, representing 1100 businesses. Approximately 80% of
our members are small businesses with less than 20 employees. The organization works on behalf of members and
the entire business community to improve the state's economic climate and to foster positive action on issues of
common concern.
H.B. No. 2502 HD 1, proposes amend Section 205·2 HRS to include asolar energy facility as a 'permitted use"
within the agricultural district on land with soil Classified as overall (master) productivity rating class Dor E by the land
study bureau's detailed land classification.
The purpose of identifying asolar energy facility as a"permitted use" in the agricultural district would simplify the
permitting process by eliminating the need for a conditional use permit from the county.
A little less than half of the State of Hawaii is presently zoned agriculture with approximately the same amount zoned
conservation (see table below).

2006

Ag

Con

Urban

Oahu

128,839
(33%)

158,519
(41%)

100,730
(26%)

Hawaii

1,214,527

1,304,347

53,722

804

2,573,400

Maui

402,992

311,601

27,981

8,326

750,900

Kauai

185,020

199,169

14,558

1,253

400,000

1,931,378

1,973,636

196,991

10,383

4,112,388

Rural

Total Acres

386,188

1132 Bishop Street, Suite 402 • Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 • Phone: (808) 545-4300 • Facsimile: (808) 545-4369

FEB-19-2008 10:54AM

FAX: 98085454369

ID:REP KARAMATSU

PAGE: 001

R=93%

CHAMBERS OF COMM

98085454369

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF HAWAII

105931 a.m.

02-19-2008

2/2

Page 2
The Chamber of Comrr.eree of Hawaii Tesjrnony on HB 2502 HOI
February 20, 2008

Much of the existing agricultural lands are fallow as the state is still struggling to transition from mono-crops and
plantation agricu~ure to other forms of agribusinesses.
The Legislature is aware of the constitutional mandate regarding important agricultural lands, which mentioned ~
desire to move the state toward becoming more self-sufficient from an agricultural perspective. Recent events in the
world have exposed Hawaii's vulnerability and dependency on imported oil, From an energy self-sufficiency
standpoint, the State should be encouraging development of awide range of alternative energy sources.
Streamlining and expediting the permitting process seems to be astep in the right direction to create incentives for
investment in alternative energy in Hawaii. With our abundance of agricultural zoned lands and the current
constraints on developing alternative energy in anyone of the other land use categories (e.g. Urban, Rural and
Conservation) it seems logical to encourage development of alternative energy in the agricultural district. Fears of
overdevelopment of solar on agricuttural zoned lands appear to be unfounded as solar is efficiency is based on high
levels of insolation. Thus, we respectfully recommend that the bill be amended to the original version prior to the
present HD 1.
Thank you for this opportunity to express our views.

FEB-19-2008 10:54AM

FAX: 98085454369

ID:REP KARAMATSU

PAGE:002

R=93%

100 Kahclu ,\renue
~lililani. Hawai'j 967S9·3997

P.O. Ilox 898900
~iililani. Hawai'i 96789·8900

(808) 5.J84811 • fax (808) 548·6670

Testimony by Castle & Cooke Hawaii
Before the House Committees on Water, Land, Ocean Resources & Hawaiian
Affairs and Agriculture
February 20, 2008
9:00am
Room 325
HB 2502 HD t Relating to Solar Energy

Chairs Ito and Tsuji, Vice Chairs Karamatsu and Brower and Members of the
Committees:
On behalf of Castle & Cooke Hawaii, thank you for allowing me to testify today.

I am Tim Hill, Executive Vice President, Castle & Cooke Lanai Renewable
Energy Programs; here to express our support for HB 2502, it is original
form, that makes solar facilities a permitted use on agricultural D and Eland.
In the alternative, we suggest that the technical voltage requirements as set
forth at Section 2, Sub (6)(D) ofHB 2502, HDt be removed as they are soon to
be outdated and are a hindrance to the development of solar facilities.
Castle & Cooke is committed to bringing renewable energy to Hawaii. Today, I
want to tell you what Castle & Cooke is doing, our record of delivering on our
commitments, and why we believe that HB 2502, in its original form is essential to
our efforts and to the success of the State's renewable energy mandate. We
strongly support HB 2502 and we further believe that the legislature should
consider possibly expanding this measure to allow solar facilities on other classes
of agricultural lands.

Caslle & Cooke Hawai'i consisls of the Hawai'j subsidiaries of Castle & Cooke, Inc. which include
Castle & Cooke Homes Hawaii, Inc., Castle & Cooke Properties, Inc., Castle &Cooke Resorts, LLC. and olher subsidiaries

Castle & Cooke Renewable Energy Programs
Castle & Cooke is committed to supporting Hawaii's energy independence by
developing alternative energy resources on the island of Lanai while preserving
unique environmental, cultural and historic resources found on the island.
In her State of the State address, Governor Lingle challenged all of us to move
Hawaii away from oil dependence and to do so "more rapidly than some would
like and others believe possible." We share this view that the time for action is
now.
At Castle & Cooke, we have already initiated projects to reduce reliance on fossil
fuels and to transfonn Lanai into a showcase for renewable and green energy.
Our projects include:
• Solar: Awaiting permit approval to create largest solar farm in Hawaii
o Converts 10 acres of "grade D" ag land to 1.5 MW solar fann
o Can supply up to 10% of Lanai's annual electricity needs
• Wind: Examining economic, cultural and environmental feasibility
o Goal is 300-400 MW wind farm from towers spaced across 10,000
acres in northern Lanai
o Could supply up to 15% of Oahu's peak power needs
• Bio-Fuels: Exploring feasibility of growing crops for fuel
o Test crops ofjatropha to be planted as part of solar program
o Working with UH College of Tropical Agriculture and HARC (with
Dole Food Company)
The investments we are prepared to make reflect our commitment to Hawaii:
• Close to $1 billion for solar and wind energy projects
• The State is pursuing an important agenda for energy independence and
other needs while struggling with a potential budget shortfall of$350
million. Castle & Cooke is committed to renewable energy, and we're
investing more than $765 million to make it happen in Hawaii.
• Our goal is to make Lanai powered by 100% renewable energy
In opening remarks, House Speaker Calvin Say noted that, "If we could just
produce half of Hawaii's energy, we could add at least $2 billion to the state's

economy. And the money stays here." Castle & Cooke's renewable energy projects
are a big step toward that vision.
We foresee additional benefits for the people of Lanai and Hawaii. We believe our
projects will help stabilize energy costs and thus stabilize the cost of living in our
state. We also believe that they will provide new job opportunities for residents.
And we know that they will help us utilize our bountiful natural resources. All of
which means, these projects are instrumental in building a truly sustainable
Hawaii.
Senate President Colleen Hanabusa said that when it comes to sustainability, we all
play for the same team. Castle & Cooke is a committed part of that team.
Castle &Cooke: Part of Hawaii's Past, Part of Hawaii's Future

Castle & Cooke has been a business leader in Hawaii for 150 years, and we plan to
be here for the next 150 years. We like to say that we are "Investing in
Hawaii ...Creating communities ...Delivering dreams."
You may know Castle & Cooke as a leading agriculture and land development
company. We're also a diversified firm with the commitment and resources to
deliver solutions. Look at our track record:
• Mililani: We promised a diverse, master-planned community for Hawaii
families, and we delivered:
o Home to over 50,000 people in more than 16,000 homes.
o Mililani is the only Hawaii community to be designated an AllAmerica City.
o In 2005, Money magazine called Mililani one of the best places to live
in the United States.
o Started in 1968, we will complete Mililani on the first quarter of 2008;
a 40 year commitment of providing homes for Hawaii Families
• Our total investment is in the order of$3.85 billion in infrastructure and
vertical construction; an average of $96 million each year for the past 40
years.
We see renewable energy as essential for Hawaii's future, and our commitment to
that future comes directly from our owner, Mr. David Murdock, who has
committed resources to make it happen. We believe renewable energy projects

make the best use of our Lanai lands, and can provide positive results for the future
of Hawaii.
Renewable energy is essential to that future. We are prepared to invest close to $1
billion of our resources in renewable energy. That's our commitment. We will
deliver.
Castle & Cooke supports HB 2502 because the legislation clarifies that solar
energy facilities are a permitted use in the agricultural district on class D and E
land.
So far, the process of establishing large scale renewable projects in Hawaii has
averaged ten years, many of which were bogged down in redundant and time
consumi~g permitting processes. This type of unpredictable and drawn out
permitting process is injurious to further investment by private industry into the
large scale renewable energy projects Hawaii needs to secure its energy future and
meets its renewable goals.
As a developer committed to Hawaii's future, what Castle & Cooke is looking to
the Legislature for is some predictability with respect to the government permitting
process. Castle & Cooke is not trying to avoid an environmental impact
statement, or any other required studies or/or reports. However, Castle &
Cooke believes that ten years is too long to be mired in redundant permitting
process t which currently does not have explicit timetables, except for the
public comment process. Castle & Cooke firmly believes that the government
permitting process needs to prioritize renewable energy projects and HB 2502
provides much needed clarification that solar facilities are approved on D and E
agricultural land.
On behalf of Castle & Cooke, I ask for your support for HB 2502. Mahalo and
thank you for your consideration of our testimony.

If you have any questions, please feel free to contact:
Harry Saunders
President, Castle & Cooke Hawaii
aktsukamoto@castlecooke.com
548-4811
Tim Hill

Executive Vice President, Castle & Cooke Lanai Renewable Energy Programs
thill@castlecooke.com
559-0286
Carleton Ching
Vice President, Castle & Cooke Hawaii, Community and Government Relations
cching@castlecooke.com
548-3776

