                      DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                                             NElLABER~

                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM
                      No. I Capitol District Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu! Hawaii 96813   Telephone:   (808) 586-2355
                      Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96604                                       Fax:         (808) 586-2377
                      Web site: ~.hawaii.govIdbedt



                                                Statement of
                                            RICHARD C. LIM
                                                 Director
                        Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                                 before the
                                       HOUSE COMMITTEES ON
                           ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                   AND
                               WATER, LAND, & OCEAN RESOURCES

                                                    Monday, March 21, 2011
                                                             9:15AM
                                              State Capitol, Conference Room 325

                                               in consideration of
                                                  SB 631, SD1
                                      RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.


              Chairs Coffinan and Chang, Vice Chair Har, and Members of the Committees.

              The Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) supports

     5B63 1 SD 1. The bill expands the permitted use of renewable energy on agricultural land.

     Expanding the permitted use of renewable energy on agricultural land helps to ensure we will

     reach the renewable portfolio standard target of 40 percent renewable generation by 2030.

              This version of the bill includes limits on the quantities of solar allowed on lands rated

     “B” and “C” and states that solar energy facilities shall not be placed in areas designated as

     Important Agricultural Lands. Therefore, it provides a balanced approach to preserving the most

     important agricultural lands while enabling the use of local solar resources to meet local energy

     needs.

              Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments.



SB631 SD1 BED 3-21-1 IEEP-WLO.doe
                                                                                               NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                             GOVERNOR
                                                                                                     RICHARD C. LIM
                                                                                                      IINTERIM DIRECTOR

            DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                                  OFFICE OF PLANNING

            ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM
            OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                          Telephone:
            235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813
            Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804



                                     Statement of
                                 JESSE K. SOUKI
                         Interim Director, Office of Planning
             Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                      before the
        HOUSE COMMITTEE ON WATER, LAND, AND OCEAN RESOURCES
                                         AND
    HOUSE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AN]) ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                        Monday, March 21, 2011
                                                 9:15 AM
                                   State Capitol, Conference Room xx

                                              in consideration of
                                                 SB631,SD1
                             RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.


       Chair Chang, Acting Chair Coffinan, Vice Chair Har, and Members of the House

Committees on Water, Land, and Ocean Resources and House Committee on Energy and

Environmental Protection.

       SB 631, SD 1, proposes to increase the areas with the State Agricultural District in which

solar energy facilities may be constructed by amending Chapter 205-2(d)(6).

       The Office of Planning is encouraged that the Senate amended this bill to limit solar

arrays built on Land Study Bureau rated “B” and “C” lands to ten per cent of each parcel.

       However, we still have concerns about allowing solar arrays to be built on “B” and “C”

rated lands because these quality agricultural lands are needed to improve food security and self-

sufficiency for Hawaii. These lands may also be used for growing bio-fuel crops which

ëontribute to renewable energy self-sufficiency, which would not permanently prevent future

food production.
        “D” and “E” rated lands comprise over 87% of lands in the State Agricultural District. In

other words, 3.3 million acres in “D” and “E”, out of the total 3.8 million acres in the State

Agricultural District, are potentially available for solar energy facilities in the State. See

attached table from the State GIS Program detailing the Land Study Bureau Rating Acreages by

Island. Before removing “B” and “C” lands from the State Agricultural District for non

agricultural uses, we recommend a review of whether existing less productive lands already meet

the objectives of this bill.

        Thank you for the opportunity to offer these comments.




38631 301 BED-OP 03-21-I i_EEP-WLO               -   2   -
                                           a
                               Hawaii Farm Bureau
                               F   E   D   E   K   A   T

                      2343 Rose Street, Honolulu, III 96819
                                                           I   0   N



             Phone: (808) 848-2074; Neighbor Islands: 1-800-482-1272
                   Fax: (808) 848-1921; e-mail: info@hthf.org

                                       TESTIMONY

          RE: SB 631St)! RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY

Chair Chang, Chair Coffman and Members of the Committees:

Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation, on behalf of our commercial farm
and ranch families and organizations requests the following
amendment to SB631 SDi, Relating TQ Renewable Energy.

HFBF agrees that renewable energy is important to Hawaii. We also
believe agriculture is not only important but critical to Hawaii’s
increased self sufficiency. We appreciate the amendment to the
original measure limiting the facility to no more than io% of the area.

We are however, concerned about the possible interpretation of the
prohibition on IAL. We believe that the intent is not to prohibit solar
facilities that may be used within an agricultural operation. To clarify
this intent, we suggest the following language.’~:


 £~) Solar energy facilities shall not be placed in areas designated as Important
Agricultural Lands pursuant to chapter 205. part III ~
  ~ (addition is double underscored)

Section 16 addresses agricultural energy facilities that are
appurtenant to the operation. Solar facilities that pump irrigation
water or assist in the drying of agricultural crops should be allowed.
Recently, in light of food safety requirements, work is proceeding on
using solar heating to sanitize water used by produce farmers. For
this reason the above clarification is needed to avoid
misinterpretations regarding the prohibition.

We respectfully request your support in amending this measure
as recommended. We appreciate this opportunity to provide our
opinion on this matter. If there are any questions, please contact
Warren Watanabe at 2819718.
                 Sierra Club
                 Hawai’i Chapter
                 P0 3ox 2577, Honolulu, HI 96803
                 aoas3aaele hawaii.chapter@sierraolub.org



        HOUSE COMMIflEE ON WATER, LAND, & OCEAN RESOURCES
      HOUSE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY & ENWRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                                    March 21, 2011, 9:15 A.M.
                                    (Testimony is 2 pages long)

                       TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO SB 631 SD1


Aloha Chair Chang, Chair Coffman, and Members of the Committees:

The Hawai’ i Chapter of the Sierra Club, with 8,000 dues-paying members and supporters,
opposes SB 631 SD1. This measure would allow solar facilities to be built on 10% of
agricultural parcels with soil classified as B or C. While this measure appears appropriately
geared towards advancing Hawai’i’s clean energy goals, it could also have a significant
detrimental effect on Hawai’i’s efforts to increase food self-sufficiency.

I.     Hawai’i~ Imported Food Crisis.

Hawai’i is tragically reliant upon imported food. We import approximately eighty-five percent
of our food. Currently, Hawaii has a fresh supply of produce for no more than ten days. Ninety
percent of the beef, sixty-seven percent of fresh vegetables, sixty-five percent of fresh fruits, and
seventy percent of all milk consumed in the state are imported.

Further, over the past 50 years, approximately 53% of Class A and B lands have been reclassified
to urban use. On Oahu alone, almost 4,000 acres of prime farmland have been recla.ssifiedin the
past 20 years.

II.    Local Food Production and Consumption.

While the picture is currently bleak, there are some glimmers of hope. Between 1990 and 2004
there was a 475% increase in the land acreage planted to vegetable crops in Oahu (from about
800 acres planted in 1990, to 3,800 acres in 2004, according to DOA annual reports). This
sudden shift of statewide vegetable production to Oahu showed that when the proper
opportunities exists, growers prefer to grow diversified crops in Oahu, to minimize inter-island
transportation costs.



it) Recycled Content              Robert D. Harris, Director
Sierra Club                       Testimony on SB 631 SD1                           Page 2


Over the past few years, there has been an increasing focus on buying and eating local. Because
of health and environmental concerns, consumers are increasingly demanding, and willing to pay
premiums for locally grown produce, as compared to imported produce (for example, see: Ray
Cross, Buy Local: Your Health Will Thank You, Madison County Courier Newspaper, NY~ Jan.
19, 2010; and Cynthia Oi, The demand is there for locally grown food, Op-ed, Honolulu Star
Bulletin, Jan. 2, 2010).

IlL     The Needfor Agricultural Land:

Regardless, even assuming that we can rely on the same level of inputs that we use today, an
analysis of self-sufficiency by two College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources
professors, investigated whether Hawaii could become self-sufficient in food production, based
on the current available land. And they answered “The answer, simply, is no” (C.N. Lee and
H.C. Bittenbendeer, Agriculture, CTA}{R Internal document). In this analysis the authors report
that Hawaii has about 249,000 acres of “good farmland.” To reach near self-sufficiently in
agricultural production they calculated that the state would need 260,800 acres, or 12,000 acres
more that what we currently have available, and these estimates were made without considering
for population increases.

IV.     Competing Uses for Agricultural Land:

Increasing the number of permissible uses on agricultural land potentially increases the cost for
current agricultural operations. Lessees, for example, may have to pay more as new and more
expensive “highest and best uses” (the normal phrase used to determine lease rents) are
established on agricultural land. Farmers may have to stop producing food and switch to
renewable energy simply to stay in business. Longterm leasing may also become more difficult
to obtain as more agricultural land is taken out of existing inventory.

Competing uses also takes valuable and finite farmland out of food production. Early
estimations for the amount of land needed for biofliels, for example, indicate tens of thousands of
acres could be required. This puts Hawai’i further down the hole in establishing a reasonable
level of food self-sufficiency.

V.     Conclusion.

This is not a zero-sum question. Let’s set policies that advance both food and energy security
goals instead of pitting these competing demands against one another. Renewable energy is
already allowed on agricultural land with a special permit. It’s unclear whether we need to rush
into allowing renewable ehergy on all agricultural land as a matter of right before doing a more
detailed and specifia analysis on the possible impacts.

Thank you for the opportunity to testis’.


* Recycled Content                  RobertD. Harris, Director
TO:           Rep. Jerry L. Chang
              Chair, Committee on Water, Land, & Ocean Resources
              Rep. Sharon E. Har
              Vice Chair, Committee on Water, Land, & Ocean Resources

              Rep. Denny Coffman
              Vice Chair, Committee on Energy & Environmental Protection
              Via Email: EDTTestimony~Capitol.hawaii.gov

FROM:         Tim Wong
              Vice President, Head of Strategy
              Sopogy, Inc.

DATE:         March 18, 2011

RE:           S.B. 631 Relating to Renewable Energy
              Hearing: Monday, March 21, 2011 at 9:15 a.m., Room 325


Dear Chair Chang, Vice Chair Har, Vice Chair Coffman and Members of the
Committee:

My name is Tim Wong and I am the Head of Strategy for Sopogy, Inc.
(Sopogy). Sopogy is a solar power technology company based in Hawaii that
uses concentration solar thermal to heat to generate electricity, process heat,
and provide solar air conditioning. Our mission is to bring renewable solar
energy technologies to Hawaii and its people for the betterment of our
environment, independence from volatile imported fossil fuels, and energy
stability.

Sopogy supports S.B. 631, as it provides the ground work to allow
companies to best utilize agricultural land. To do social good while they
making profits. This measure will allow both corporations a blend and use the
land for its best use.

This will allow solar energy to displace fossil fuels generated near agriculture
B and C land. hybrid entities pay taxes and can have shareholders, without
the risk of being sued for not maximizing profits. We believe this will allow
companies to focus on doing what is right for the environment.




                                      nfl&                                                I

         P: (808) 833-4747 F (808) 356 0565 2660 Waiwai Loop Honolulu, HI 96819 www sopogy corn
Thank you for this opportunity to present testimony in support of this measure.




                                                                                                  r




                             nfl.. ~7z”~
        P (808) 833-4747 F (808) 356-0585 2860 Waiwai Loop Honolulu, HI 96819 I www Sopogy corn   ‘
  RONALD Y. AMEMIYA                                                                          Suite 2100- MaukaTower
     ATTORNEYAT LAW                                                                              737 Bishop Street
                                                                                                Honolulu, HI 96813
                                                                                            Telephone - (808) 226-7065
                                                                                               FAX - (808) 523-1714
                                                                                             ramemiya @hawaiLrr.con-i


            March 18, 2011

            Hon. Jerry L. Chang, Chair
            Committee.on Water, Land & Ocean Resources

            Hon. Denny Cofiban, Acting Chair
            Committee on Energy & Environmental Protection

            Conference Room 325        —   hearing room, Monday, March 21,2011, 9:15 a.m.

            Re: HB63 1. SDI (SSCR4S9)          —   Relating to Renewable Energy

            Dear Chairs Chang & Coffman & Members of WLO & EEP:

                   The purpose of this measure is to increase, with certain limitations, the areas
            within agricultural lands in which solar energy facilities may be constructed.

                    Under the present law, aquaculture, wind generated energy production, and
            biofuel production can be carried out on certain agricultural lands without the land
            owners obtaining Conditional Use Permits. Presently, said permits must be obtained for
            solar energy facilities.

                     Solar energy falls into the same category as wind generated energy and biofuel in
            that all 3 are renewable sources. It would only seem fair and equitable for solar energy to
            also be accorded the same treatment as wind and biofliel energies. The increase in the
            production of solar energy to feed into the HECO lines would decrease Hawaii’s
            dependence on crude oil that pollutes our environment. Furthermore, the construction of
            these solar energy facilities would provide desperately needed jøbs for our people.

                   For the above reasons, we support HB631, SD1.


                                                              Sincerely,



                                                              Ronald V. Amethiya

            Fax No.   —   586-8504




MAR-19-2011. 04:O3PM        FAX:1 909 523 1714                  XD:REP HAR                   PAt3E:OOj     R=96”
                                         Statement of
                              William Reese Liggett, private citizen
                                           before the

        HOUSE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION,
                   AND WATER, LAND, & OCEAN RESOURCES

                               Monday, March 21, 2011, 9:15AM

                              State Capitol, Conference Room 325
                                      in consideration of

                          1SB631 SDI relating to renewable energy.~

Chair Coffman, Chair Chang, Vice Chair Har and committee members:

I oppose 5B631 SD1 because it would allow development of some of Hawaii’s best farm lands
for the production of solar energy.
While D and E land may be expendable for such industrial purpose, A, B, and C land are too
valuable to allow solar-electric systems beyond such as necessary for agricultural systems on
that land.
The time to draw a strong line against non food production exploitation of our top three grades
of ag land is now.
I strongly recommend that these committees do not pass this Bill.
Respectfully,

Reese Liggett, 4947 Maunalani Circle, Honolulu 96816
                                     Statement of Alice K. Liggett
                                             before the

        HOUSE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION,
                   AND WATER, LAND, & OCEAN RESOURCES
                             Monday, March 21, 2011
                                      9:15AM
                       State Capitol, Conference Room 325
                               in consideration of

                                         SB631 SD1
                              RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.

Chair Coffman, Chair Chang, Vice Chair Har and committee members:

        I oppose SB631 SW. The bill shamelessly expands the land where solar energy
production is permitted. It expands the permitted use of renewable energy on agricultural land
unnecessarily and unwisely reduces the availability of B and C agricultural land for food
production. I propose that renewable energy development be restricted to ONLY D and E
a~riculture land.
        Agricultural land is being wasted and we need to preserve it for future food production
and open space NOW. Every landowner wants to develop its land for big money but we should
be saving the agricultural land instead. The land that we save from industrial development of
solar energy can be used for farming of local foods.
        5B631 proposes that solar energy facilities are allowed to build on B and C land. This is
unacceptable because it can destroy the future for generations to come. The more you build
now, the less land and options you have later. Once the land is built on, it can never be the
same.
        In the past 20 years, Oahu alone has change the category of almost 4,000 acres of our
key farmland. I strongly recommend this bill be held by these committees. Alternative energy
development is important, but not and the expense of A, B, and C agricultural land.

I appreciate this opportunity to testify,

Alice Liggett, Maunalani Heights, Kaimuki, Honolulu 96816
