                                                                                                                       NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                    DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                                                        GOVERNOR

                                                                                                                             RICHARD C, LIM
                    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM                                                                           INTERIM DIRECTOR



                    No.1 Capitol District Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813   Telephone:    (808) 586-2355
                    Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                      Fax:          (808) 586-2377
                    Web site: www.hawaii.gov/dbedt



                                            Statement of
                                        RICHARD C. LIM
                                         Interim Director
                    Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                              before the
                  SENATE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT,
                     AGRICULTURE, AND WATER, LAND, & HOUSING
                                    Thursday, February 24,2011
                                               3:20PM
                                State Capitol, Conference Room 225

                                                         in consideration of
                                                                  SB631
                                   RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.


            Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Chair Dela Cruz, Vice. Chair English, Vice Chair

     Kahele, Vice Chair Solomon, and Members of the Committees.

            The Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) supports

     SB631. The bill expands the permitted use of renewable energy on agricultural land, which

     accounts for roughly 47 percent of the land in the state. Expanding the permitted use of

     renewable energy on agricultural land helps to ensure we will reach the renewable portfolio

     standard target of 40 percent renewable generation by 2030.

            Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments.




SB631_BED_02-24-11_ENE-AGL-WLH
                                                                                                    NEil ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                               GOVERNOR
                                                                                                       RICHARD C. LIM
                                                                                                        IINTERIM DIRECTOR
                                                                                               MARY LOU KOBAYASHI
            DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                     PLANNING PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR
                                                                                                      OFFICE OF PLANNING

            ECONOMIC DEVElOPMENT & TOURISM
                                                                                           Telephone: (808) 587-2846
            OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                                   Fax: (808) 587·2824
            235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813
            Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804



                                         Statement of
                                MARY LOU KOBAYASm
                     Planning Program Administrator, Office of Planning
                 Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                           before the
               SENATE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT,
                      SENATE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
                                              AND
               SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER, LAND, AND HOUSING
                                 Thursday, FeblUary 24, 2011
                                            3:20 PM
                             State Capitol, Conference Room 225

                                     in consideration of
                                           SB631
                             RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.


       Chairs Gabbard, Nishihara and Dela CIUZ, Vice Chairs English, Kahele and Solomon,

and Members of the Senate Committees on Energy and Environment, Agriculture, and Water,

Land, and Housing.

       SB 631 proposes to remove the CUlTent limitations on location, size, and linkage with

agricultural activities of solar energy facilities in the State Agricultural District by amending

Chapter 205-2(d)(6), HRS and §205-4.5(16) HRS.

       Wind machines and wind farms are already allowed as permitted uses in all productivity

rating categories in the State Agricultural District without limitation. When wind energy

machines were added as permitted uses, it was argued that wind machines have a small foot print

which would not preclude high productivity land from being farmed.
       The Office of Planning is opposed to expanding unlimited solar energy facilities to "B"

and "C" rated lands because these quality agricultural lands are needed to improve food security

and self-sufficiency for Hawaii. They may also be used for growing bio-fuel crops which

contribute to renewable energy self-sufficiency, but don't permanently prevent future food

production. "D" and "E" rated lands comprise over 87% oflands in the State Agricultural

District. The Office of Planning believes that the 3.3 million acres in "D" and "E", out ofthe

total 3.8 million acres in the State Agricultural District, offer sufficient lands for solar energy

facilities. See attached table from the State GIS Program detailing the Land Study Bureau

Rating Acreages by Island.

       Thanlc you for the opportunity to offer these comments.




                                                 -2-
                                                              Land Study Bureau Ratings
                                                                  Acreage By Island
      LSBlYPE            Hawaii Acres         Kauai Acres       Lanai Acres               Maui Acres   Molokai Acres   Oahu Acres   Total Acres
         A                          0                 9,577               0                  32,190             703       16,031        58,500
         B                     46,430                27,135               0                  18,670               0       25,854       118,089
         C                    214,395                26,229           4,471                  36,629           3,930       14,958       300,612
         0                    570,834                29,220         20,532                   95,543          42,036       10,561       768,726
         E                  1,698.303               246,638         62,226                  261,774         117,471      208,602     2,595,013
                            2,529,962               338,797         87,228                  444,807         164,140      276,005     3,840,941

 See also:
  http://hawaii.gov/dbedt/gis/lsb_nate.htm
  http://hawaii.gov/dbedt/gis/data/Isb.pdf

 Percentages                   Hawaii                 Kauai           Lanai                    Maui         Molaka;        Oahu      Statewide
 %A & B of total                 1.84                 10.84            0.00                   11.43           0.43         15.18          4.60
 %A, B, C aftotal               10.31                 1858             5.13                   19.67            2.82        20.59         12.42




Prepared by Office of Planning, State GIS Program                                                                                      HAWAII
                                                                                                                                       STATEWIDE
January 27, 2011                                                                                                                       GIS
                                                                                                                                       PROGRAM

SB631~ED-O~_02~24-11_ENE(AGL(WLH~attachment
                                 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING
                        CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
                              650 SOUTH KING S;TREET, 7 TH FLOOR • HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813
                                       PHONE: (BOB) 76B·BOOO • FAX: (808) 768-6041
                          DEPT. WEB SITE: www.honoluludpp,org • CITY WEB SITE: www.honoturU.gov




                                                                                                    DAVID K. TANOUE
PETER B. CARLISLE                                                                                       DIRECTOR
     MAYOR
                                                                                                    JIRO A. SUMADA
                                                                                                    DEPUTY DIRECTOR




                                                 February 24, 2011


      The Honorable Senator Mike Gabbard, Chair
       and Members of the Committee on Energy and Environment
      The Honorable Senator Clarence K. Nishihara, Chair
       and Members of the Committee on Agriculture
      The Honorable Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair
       and Members of the Committee on Water, Land, and Housing
      State. Senate                                     .
      State Capitol
      Honolulu, Hawaii 96813

      Dear Chairs Gabbard, Nishihara, Dela Cruz, and Members:

                              Subject: Senate Bill No. 631
                                       Relating to Renewable Energy

               The Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) supports with modifications Senate
     . Bill No. 631. This bill would allow renewable solar and agriculture energy facilities on state
       agricultural lands without restriction. We request that these facilities be limited to lands·
       designated by the Land Study Bureau Master Productivity rating of "C", "D", "E", or "U", and any
       lands that are not designated as "Important Agricultural Lands" pursuant to Section 205, Part III;
       Hawaii Revised Statutes.

               We are concerned that the availability of quality agricultural lands could be significantly
     . reduced should successful renewable energy facilities proliferate on agricultural lands. Large-
       scale photovoltaic arrays (solar panels) have the potential to consume large areas of high quality
       agricultural lands and compete with the same lands needed for food production.

             Please pass Senate Bill No. 631 with the above suggested modification. Thank you for
      the opportunity to testify.

                                                        Very truly yours,



                                                                         ue, Director
                                                                        f Planning and Permitting

      DKT: jmf
      sb631-RenewEne-ks.doc
               TESTIMONY OF
               THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
               TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011

ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE:
S.B. NO. 0631, RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.
BEFORE THE:

SENATE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT, AGRICULTURE, AND
WATER, LAND, AND HOUSING"

DATE:         Thursday, February 24, 2011       TIME:   3: 20   p. m.
LOCATION:     State Capitol, Room 225
TESTlFIER(S): David M. Louie, Attorney General," or
              Bryan C. Yee, Deputy Attorney General

Chairs Gabbard, Nishihara, and Dela Cruz and Members of the
Committees:
        The Attorney General provides the following technical
comments for your consideration.
        Section 20S-4.S(a), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) , sets
forth the permissible uses of agricultural lands with an overall
productivity rating class of A or B.        section 3 of this bill
proposes to amend section 20S-4.S(a), HRS, to expand the term
"agricultural-energy facilities" to include any facility that
"generates, stores, or distributes renewable energy as defined
in section 269-91 or renewable fuel including electrical or
thermal energy or liquid or" gaseous fuels."       Section 269-91,
HRS, defines "renewable energy" as energy generated or produced
using various sources, including, among other things, wind and
biofuels.     So, an "agricultural-energy facility" includes wind
and biofuel facilities.
        Wind and biofuel facilities are already among the
permissible uses in section 20S-4.S(a), HRS.        In expanding the
definition of "agricultural-energy facilities," therefore, this
bill creates an ambiguity with respect to these two categories
Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General
Twenty-Sixth Legislature, 2011
Page 2 of 2

of permissible uses.      Section 205-4.5(14) and (15), HRS, imposes
conditions on wind and biofuel facilities.            The proposed bill
sets forth no restrictions ~n agricultural-energy facilities
which include wind and biofuel facilities.            The bill is
ambiguous, therefore, as to whether the restrictions on wind and
biofuel facilities will continue to apply if this measure is
signed into law.
     If the Legislature intends to remove the restrictions
currently imposed for wind and biofuel facilities, then it
should delete section 205-4.5(a) (14)       (wind energy) and section
205-4.5(a) (15)   (biofuel).    If the legislature intends to
maintain these restrictions, then it should change the
definition of "agricultural-energy facility."            In either case,
however, the Legislature should take some action to avoid the
ambiguity.
     We respectfully submit this information to the committees
for their consideration.
                                 ®HA
                                 OFFICE OF HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS
                                 Legislative Testimony

                                         SB631
                        RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY
                    Senate Committee on Energy and Environment
                          Senate Committee on Agriculture
                   Senate Committee on Water, Land, and Housing

February 24, 2011                      3:20 p.m.                          Room 225

       The Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) offers the following COMMENTS on
SB 631. This bill has the potential to dramatically alter the use of agricultural lands
in Hawai'i by allowing for solar energy facilities on lands with high capacity for
intensive cultivation (lands with overall productivity rating of B or C) and
agricultural-energy facilities which are not required to have a connection to
agriculture.

       OHA appreciates and understands the need for increased access to
renewable energy infrastructure and particularly the need for sustainable access to
energy for farmers participating in authentic agricultural activities. OHA notes
however, in establishing agricultural districts, HRS § 205-2 provides that "the
greatest possible protection shall be given to those lands with a high capacity for
intensive cultivation." Permitting solar energy facilities on lands with overall
productivity rating of B or C may remove lands with high capacity for intensive
cultivation from future agricultural activities.

         Additionally, as of 2008, HRS § 205-4.5 allows for agricultural-energy
facilities on agricultural lands where the primary activity is related to cultivation of
crops (including bioenergy, flowers, vegetables, foliage, fruits, forage, and timber
crops) or raising of livestock (including poultry, bees, fish, or other animal or
aquatic life). Only two years ago, this amendment considerably broadened
permissible uses within agricultural districts. SB 631 would further expand
permissible uses within agricultural districts by allowing energy facilities on
agricultural lands without a connection to agriculture. This could have significant
implications for lands with a high capacity for intensive cultivation and adjacent
landowners and residents.

       Mahalo nui loa for allowing us to provide testimony.




                                                                                           1
                                                             Fax Submittal: 586-6659
                         Email Submittal:ENET~.~~·;t"irnonv;.(fC;xDitcl.ha;.vnii.gt)\.

                                                    Testimony by Harry Saunders
                                                  President, Castle & Cooke Hawai'i
                                                         February 23, 2011

                                                   Before the Senate Committees on
                                                ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
                                                 Senator Mike Gabbard, Chair
                                              Senator J. Kalani English, Vicc chair

                                                        AGRICULTURE
                                              Senator Clarence K Nishihara, Chair
                                               Senator Gilbert Kahele, Vice Chair

                                                   WATER, LAND AND HOUSING
                                             Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair
                                             Senator MilJama Solomon, Vice Chair

                                                                      February 24,2011
                                                                          3:20 p.m.
                                                                          Room 225

                                                            In Support of SB 631
                                                 RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY

Chairs Gabbard, Nishihara., Dela Cruz; Vice Chairs English, Kahele and Solomon
and Members of the ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT, AGRICULTURE and WATER,
LAND AND HOUSING Committees.

I am Harry Saunders, President of Castle & Cooke Hawai'i. We support SB 631
that authorizes renewable energy production as a permitted use on agricultural
lands, regardless of whether or not agricultural activity is the primary activity of
the renewable energy enterprise.

Allowing renewable energy facilities on agricultural lands is a sustainable use and
can help reduce Hawai'i's dependency on fossil fuels. Especially if there are


                          ><k.\ ::>,':':.'.' ! ::"-,::C .:(:~~i~~:> ,~! i\' ::':jY':!~': s~~::,;,.ii(;i!C~;;i \:::<;~. ,\ Cc"k,:. :1:-'. 'i h;\:!~ :rLL;,~l'
         ••   >   ,",   \"~;.,, ;:-::".',~ 'i:F~ " ... ;"" c::~,;:: ::~ ~:i)(-:,~'               i:1l' .. ~'il.<'·~: \,',;,.:\i:' s.,.\:,:;;-:, :,;.,. :,:;,J ni r,3 ,n;\,;J::r;L',
sustained wind and solar resources on agricultural land, capturing these
rcsources can provide a reliable alternate energy source and clean energy for our
future.

La Ola solar farm (1.2 MW peak) on Lana'i is a good example of using fallow
agriculture lands to capture the sun's resources to provide an alternate energy
source to the Lana'i electrical grid. We are exploring other wind and solar
resources, many of which are on our agricultural lands, to help reduce Hawai'i's
dependency on fossil fuels.

On behalf of Castle & Cooke, 1 respectfully request your support for SB 631.
Mahalo for your consideration of our testimony. If you have questions, please feel
free to contact us:

      Harry Saunders, President
      Castle & Cooke Hawai'i
     {;ik t s u karr1f)tc:!.a.'ca 8t k·coo kc. con}
     548-4884

      Richard Mirikitani, Senior Vice President and Counsel
      Castle & Cooke Hawai'i
      1'1'1."1 iriki ta n iC(I:castlecooke .com
      548-4890

      Carleton Ching, Vice President - Community and Government Relations
      Castle & Cooke Hawai'i
     cc hing(j~ca st i.ccooke. corn
     548-3793




                                                                                    2
                                  ~~
                            Hawaii Fann Bureau
                            FBDEIlATlON

                     2343 Rose Street, Honolulu, HI 96819
            Phone: (808) 848-2074; Neighbor Islands: 1-800-482-1272
                  Fax: (808) 848-1921; e-mail: info@hfbf.org

                                TESTIMONY

           RE: SB 631 RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY

Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Chair DelaCruz and Members of the
Committees:

Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation, on behalf of our commercial farm
and ranch families and organizations is in Strong Opposition of
SB631, Relating To Renewable Energy.

  HFBF agrees that renewable energy is important to Hawaii. We also
  believe agriculture is not only important but critical to Hawaii's
  increased self sufficiency. This measure does not balance but rather
  prioritizes the need for renewable energy over agriculture. Existing
  law, recognized the land classification history in Hawaii and provided
  certain classes oflands for use in renewable energy production. At
  the same time it preserved certain lands for use for agricultural
. production. There are several reasons why this measure does not
 balance Hawaii's needs.
     1. Renewable energy's cost structure is not similar to
        agriculture; Solar and wind operations, after initial capital
        investments are not subject to swings in global swings in energy
        costs. Agriculture is extremely sensitive. Crop inputs and
        supplies along with transportation costs are subject to global
        energy pricing significantly affecting their profitability.

   2. Renewable energy companies will be able to pay more
      for agricultural lands. The willingness and ability to pay
      more for land will put our farmers and ranchers at risk.


   3. Renewable energy companies will compete for the best
      lands. Good terrain and access to existing infrastructure are
      key components to reducing costs for farmers and ranchers.
      They are the same needs for solar and wind companies. Again,
      farmers and ranchers are put in risk.
[Type text]




    4. Renewable energy companies have greater access to
       capital. Federal and State incentives along with angel
       investors are readily available to renewable energy companies.
       Such financing is only a dream for farmers and ranchers.

    5. Lands that go out of farming will rarely be put back
       into agricultural production.


    6. Existing law allows for rezoning to allow renewable
       energy operations. Currently the state and counties are in
       need of funds. Putting a use such as renewable energy, which is
       an INDUSTRIAL use, on low priced agricultural lands literally
       gives away tax resources. If agricultural lands are desired for
       this use, lands should be REZONED for this use. This
       mechanism already exists and Counties have the ability to
       exercise this practice if there is a strong desire that a renewable
       energy venture is in the public interest. This bill literally gives
       away this case by case consideration and puts Hawaii's
       agriculture at risk.

We respectfully request your support in OPPOSING this
legislation. By opposing this bill, it does not mean that
renewable energy development is opposed but rather that
agriculture is supported. This is an important message to
support Hawaii's desire for increased self sufficiency.

We appreciate this opportunity to provide our opinion on this matter.
If there are any questions, please contact Warren Watanabe at
2819718 .
                  Sierra Club
                   Hawaj/j Chapter
                  PO Box 2577, Honolulu, HI 96803
                  808.538.6616 hawaii.c:hapter@e;ierraalub.org




                SENATE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT
                     SENATE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
               SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER, LAND,AND HOUSING

                                       February 24, 2011, 2:45 P.M.
                                        (Testimony is 3 pages long)

                            TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO SB 631


Aloha Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Chair Dela Cruz, and Members of the Committees:

The Hawai'i Chapter of the Sierra Club, with 8,000 dues-paying members and supporters,
opposes SB 631. This measure would allow renewable energy production as a pennitted use on
all agricultural lands. 1 While this measure appears appropriately geared towards advancing
Hawai'i's clean energy goals, it could also have a significant detrimental effect on Hawai'i's
efforts to increase food self-sufficiency.

I.      Hawai'i's Imported Food Crisis.

Hawai'i is tragically reliant upon imported food. We import approximately eighty-five percent
of our food. Currently, Hawaii has a fresh supply of produce for no more than ten days. Ninety
percent of the beef, sixty-seven percent of fresh vegetables, sixty-five percent of fresh fruits, and
seventy percent of all milk consumed in the state are imported.

Further, over the past 50 years, approximately 53% of Class A and B lands have been reclassified
to urban use. On Oahu alone, almost 4,000 acres of prime farmland have been reclassified in the
past 20 years.

II.     Local Food Production and Consumption.

While the picture is currently bleak, there are some glimmers of hope. Between 1990 and 2004
there was a 475% increase in the land acreage planted to vegetable crops in Oahu (from about


1 It also appears that this measure would restrict agricultural lands with soil productivity rating class C, D,
E, or U to only the development of agricultural-energy facilities. See SUbsection (c) (limiting uses to what
is set forth in subsection (a)(16)). Either this is an incorrect interpretation or a critical mistake in drafting.

'"' Recycled Content
~il'                                  Robert D. Harris, Director
Sierra Club                          Testimony on S8 631                              Page 2


800 acres planted in 1990, to 3,800 acres in 2004, according to DOA annual reports). This
sudden shift of statewide vegetable production to Oahu showed that when the proper
opportunities exists, growers prefer to grow diversified crops in Oahu, to minimize inter-island
transportation costs.

Over the past few years, there has been an increasing focus on buying and eating local. Because
of health and environmental concerns, consumers are increasingly demanding, and willing to pay
premiums for locally grown produce, as compared to imported produce (for example, see: Ray
Cross, Buy Local: Your Health Will Thank You, Madison County Courier Newspaper, NY, Jan.
19,2010; and Cynthia Oi, The demand is there for locally grown food, Op-ed, Honolulu Star
Bulletin, Jan. 2, 2010).

III.    The Needfor Agricultural Land.

Hawai'i has failed to do adequate land use planning to identify the land and resources necessary
to become more self-sufficient. 2 There is a desperate need for planning models to be developed
based on different social/economic, or environmental contingencies. For instance, prohibitive
prices for energy in the future may mean that production lands should be in close proximity to
consumers, i.e. each community or county may try to reach a certain level of self-sufficiency.3

Regardless, even assuming that we can rely on the same level of inputs that we use today, an
analysis of self-sufficiency by two College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources
professors, investigated whether Hawaii could become self-sufficient in food production, based
on the current available land. And they answered "The answer, simply, is no" (C.N. Lee and
H.C. Bittenbendeer, Agriculture, CTAHR Internal document). In this analysis the authors report
that Hawaii has about 249,000 acres of "good farmland." To reach near self-sufficiently in


2 Admittedly, it is difficult to predict accurately the total amount of land that may be needed to
obtain a certain volume of production, because productivity may be affected by soil type, soil
quality, elevation, rainfall patterns, incidence of pests, seed quality, production technology,
availability of key resources such as nutrients, energy, and water, farmer management skills, and
several other factors. To maintain a similar level of productivity (pounds of produce per acre)
models often assume that we will be able to rely on the same levels of inputs (fertilizers,
pesticides, machinery, energy), as we have in the past.

3 Many communities in our state are already discussing issues of community self-sufficiency. As

an example the Hamakua agricultural draft plan (http://ruralhamakua.orgO makes mention of the
type of agricultural systems that are needed to promote self-sufficiency and sustainability. More
recently a Food Summit held in the Kohala Coast held a discussion about target goals for self-
sufficiency i.e. how much of the food consumed by the community should be grown locally
(http://www.slideshare.netlandreadean/north-kohalafood-forum-presentation-august-22-09).Itis
not unreasonable that in the future, other communities would want to establish similar goals of
self-sufficiency.

o Recycled Content                  Robert D. Harris, Director
Sierra Club                         Testimony on S8 631                             Page 3


agricultural production they calculated that the state would need 260,800 Acres, or 12,000 Acres
more that what we currently have available, and these estimates were made without considering
for population increases.

IV.       Competing Uses for Agricultural Land.

Increasing the number of permissible uses on agricultural land potentially increases the cost for
current agricultural operations. Lessees, for example, may have to pay more as new aod more
expensive "highest aod best uses" (the normal phrase used to determine lease rents) are
established on agricultural land. Farmers may have to stop producing food and switch to
renewable energy simply to stay in business. Longterm leasing may also become more difficult
to obtain as more agricultural land is taken out of existing inventory.

Competing uses also takes valuable aod finite farmland out of food production. Early
estimations for the amount of land needed for biofuels, for example, indicate tens of thousands of
acres could be required. This puts Hawai'i further down the hole in establishing a reasonable
level of food self-sufficiency.

V.        Conclusion.

This is not a zero-sum question. Let's set policies that advance both food and energy security
goals instead of pitting these competing demands against one aoother. Renewable energy is
already allowed on agricultural land with a special permit. It's unclear whether we need to rush
into allowing renewable energy on all agricultural land as a matter of right before doing a more
detailed and specific analysis on the possible impacts.

Thank you for the opportunity to testifY.




-
~jlt   Recycled Content            Robert D. Harris, Director
Aloha Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Chair Dela Cruz, and Members of the
Committees:

My name is Anthony Aalto and as a concerned citizen I wish to oppose SB 631.-

I believe this bill is premature and that a headlong rush to pass it may provoke unforeseen
consequences.

By allowing installation of huge photovoltaic arrays on our best farmland, the bill seeks
to promote greater energy self-sufficiency at the expense of greater food self-sufficiency.

But we are as equally and dangerously dependent on imports from overseas for our food
as for our energy. We barely produce 15% of what we consume. Though local food
farming is rapidly expanding, it is in a constant race with rising land prices as developers
hoard land for suburbanization schemes ..

Permitting large scale renewable energy arrays on our best farmland would simply add
another If we allow this bill to go through how much of our best food growing farmland
will we lose?

Unless and until we can answer that question, we should not allow this bill to advance.

With respect I ask you to press the state to study how much fannland might be lost to this
measure and to defer the bill in the meantime until the next legislative session.

I thank you for this opportunity to testify.

Anthony Aalto
SENATE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT
SENATE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER, LAND, AND HOUSING
February 24,2011,2:45 P.M.

TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO SB 631
Aloha Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Chair Dela Cruz, and Members of the Committees:

Hawai'i is tragically reliant upon imported food. We import approximately eighty-five percent
of our food. Currently, Hawaii has a fresh supply of produce for no more than ten days. Ninety
percent of the beef, sixty-seven percent of fresh vegetables, sixty-five percent of fresh fruits, and
seventy percent of all milk consumed in the state are imported.

Further, over the past 50 years, approximately 53% of Class A and B lands have been reclassified
to urban use. On Oahu alone, almost 4,000 acres of prime farmland have been reclassified in the
past 20 years.

While the picture is currently bleak, there are some glimmers of hope. Between 1990 and 2004
there was a 475% increase in the land acreage planted to vegetable crops in Oahu (from about 800
acres planted in 1990, to 3,800 acres in 2004, according to .DOA annual reports). This
sudden shift of statewide vegetable production to Oahu showed that when the proper
opportunities exists, growers prefer to grow diversified crops in Oahu, to minimize inter-island
transportation costs.

Over the past few years, there has been an increasing focus on buying and eating local. Because
of health and environmental concerns, consumers are increasingly demanding, and willing to pay
premiums for locally grown produce, as compared to imported produce (for example, see: Ray
Cross, Buy Local: Your Health Will Thank You, Madison County Courier Newspaper, NY, Jan.
19, 2010; and Cynthia Oi, The demand is there for locally grown food, Op-ed, Honolulu Star
Bulletin, Jan. 2, 2010).

Hawai'i has failed to do adequate land use planning to identify the land and resources necessary
to become more self-sufficient.2 There is a desperate need for planning models to be developed
based on different social/economic, or environmental contingencies. For instance, prohibitive
prices for energy in the future may mean that production lands should be in close proximity to
consumers, i.e. each community or county may try to reach a certain level of self-sufficiencY.3
Regardless, even assuming that we can rely on the same level of inputs that we use today, an
analysis of self-sufficiency by two College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources
professors, investigated whether Hawaii could become self-sufficient in food production, based
on the current available land. And they answered "The answer, simply, is no" (C.N. Lee and
H.C. Bittenbendeer, Agriculture, CTAHR Internal document). In this analysis the authors report
that Hawaii has about 249,000 acres of "good farmland." To reach near self-sufficiently in
agricultural production they calculated that the state would need 260,800 Acres, or 12,000 Acres
more that what we currently have available, and these estimates were made without considering
for population increases.

Increasing the number of permissible uses on agricultural land potentially increases the cost for
current agricultural operations. Lessees, for example, may have to pay more as new and more
expensive "highest and best uses" (the normal phrase used to determine lease rents) are
established on agricultural land. Farmers may have to stop producing food and switch to
renewable energy simply to stay in business. Longterm leasing may also become more difficult
to obtain as more agricultural land is taken out of existing inventory.
Competing uses also takes valuable and finite farmland out of food production. Early
estimations for the amount of land needed for biofuels, for example, indicate tens of thousands of
acres could be required. This puts Hawai'i further down the hole in establishing a reasonable
level of food self-sufficiency.
This is not a zero-sum question. Let's set policies that advance both food and energy security
goals instead of pitting these competing demands against one another. Renewable energy is
already allowed on agricultural land with a special permit. It's unclear whether we need to rush
into allowing renewable energy on all agricultural land as a matter of right before doing a more
detailed and specific analysis on the possible impacts.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify.


Brian Bell

4626 Sierra Dr

Honolulu, HI 96816

808-227-7087
SB631

Please OPPOSE this bin. This is one of the most short-sighted bills I have read. Yes we
need to stop the importation of ditty oil. But, we cannot forget we impolt food too. We
need our lands for food. There are MANY other ways to generate renewable energy. To
grow fuel is so 20th century! We need to stop thinking in the form ofliquid fuel. No
matter how we obtain it, it will NEVER be sustainable or "green". Hawaii has an
abundance of sun, wind, and ocean currents to help us with our energy needs. Please do
NOT pass this bill!

Thank you for your time,

Bobby McClintock, Honolulu, HI



Testimony for ENE/AGL/WLH 2/24/2ell 3:2e:ee PM SB631

Conference room: 22S
Testifier position: oppose
Testifier will be present: No
Submitted by: Jane Yamashiro
Organization: Individual
Submitted on: 2/24/2e11

Comments:
I oppose this measure as it is one that could have many unintended consequences.
While energy is important, equally important is the agricultural lands. Without
careful consideration of the type or the appropriate alternative energy
production that will take place on the ag lands, blanket approval of use of ag
lands is not a responsible solution.
Testimony for ENE/AGL/WLH 2/24/2e11 3:2e:ee PM SB631

Conference room: 225
Testifier position: oppose
Testifier will be present: No
Submitted by: Scott Hamilton
Organization: Individual
Submitted on: 2/24/2e11

Comments:
Aloha Senators:I am a strong supporter for alternate energy;but Hawaii also has a
problem with importing food.To use any agriculture land for alternate energy
needs some special investigation to determine if the said land would be better
held in agriculture.It is a hard situation where need to choose between alternate
energy or agriculture land.Also the cost of agi land would be greatly
increased,which would be a hinderance to a goal to have more of our food grown
here.Mahalo nui loa for your no vote;and hoping for a balance approach to agri
land use and alternate energy. Sincerely Scott Hamilton


Testimony for ENE/AGL/WLH 2/24/2e11 3:2e:ee PM SB631

Conference room: 225
Testifier position: oppose
Testifier will be present: No
Submitted by: Marjorie Erway
Organization: Individual
Submitted on: 2/23/2e11

Comments:
While Hawaii definitely needs to accelerate clean energy development, caution is
required before covering our ag land with biofuels instead of our own food. This
could put farmers out of business, and more importantly, continue to make us non-
sustainable for our food supply.

There is already an adequate process to obtain a variance to develop renewable
energy projects on ag land. Importation of food is JUST as DETRIMENTAL to our
longterm stability goals as is the importation of dirty oil. There are several
other ways to generate renewable energy, like putting solar panels on top of
roofs.

There needs to be a well-reasoned and appropriate balance between our food and
energy goals.

I believe we need to know the potential impacts of this bill before passing it.
Please require the Legislative Reference Bureau, or some other agency, take a
look at this issue in more depth, and be ready for next year's session to
adequately vote on some bill like this.

Sincerely,
Marjorie Erway
                                               TESTIMONY OPPOSING SB 631

Kill Bill SB631. This is a terrible bill that would, among other things, allow waste-to-energy facilities on Ag land (see
pg.9, lines 17-18), allow organic waste refineries and all their fuel tanks, pipelines and truck traffic on Ag land, and allow
our best Ag lands to be used for such "energy" projects---all without regard to neighbors, EIS review or the closer
scrutiny of zoning change reviews. This is really bad for neighbors, bad for agriculture, bad for Hawai'i.

The bill and other current proposals would encourage our precious Ag lands to be monopolized by "biofuel "trops
instead of food crops, in the attempt to produce locally our fuels for HECO power plants and transportation, thus
perpetuating the combustion-based technologies that desperately need to be converted to other, non-combustion
renewable sources. Should much of the remaining sugar and pineapple lands, pasture lands and other Ag lands be used
for "biofuel" production, then it will be (1) tying up much of the state's best Ag land and sending its soil nutrients up in
smoke, (2) causing intense competition with real food-growing agriculture, (3) allowing this competition to drive up the
price and taxes on Ag lands so high that real food'agriculture will be severely hindered or impossible for the smaller,
non-corporate farmers, and (4) will drive us away from the state's goals of increasing Hawaii diversified agriculture and
food self-security. The fuels market is insatiable; its cost to consumer ever-elevating.

We have already experienced how elevated land values can inhibit agriculture when the plantations decided to
exchange growing crops for growing houses, many of these houses for folks who had yet to arrive. This switch greatly
elevated the cost and taxes of Ag land beyond the means of local people-look how much ofthe former cane and pine
land wound up being sold to off-shore buyers.     The profits from food-growing can never compete with those of fuels,
so any competition for land will be one-sided.

This bill will drive us back into the era of plantation agriculture, especially odious now that so much of the former
plantation lands are in off-shore ownership. Do we really want to consider going back to a small number of business
people calling the shots for these islands?

Kill Bill SB631.

Mahalo for the chance to share my views on this bill.

Rick Warshauer, Volcano
Testimony for ENE/AGL/WLH 2/24/2011 3:20:00 PM SB631

Conference room: 22S
Testifier position: oppose
Testifier will be present: No
Submitted by: janice palma-glennie
Organization: Individual
Submitted on: 2/24/2011

Comments:
While I am a strong supporter of alternative energy,and the use of agricultural
lands in economically feasible ways, this bill has many shortcomings and
ramification, especially for the Big Island. I have many questions and
reservations related to it, and living on ag land that isn't the right place for
many heavier type ag endeavors.

I've long been a been a proponent of sub-classes of ag lands to include
ag/industrial (i.e., macnut processing), ag tourism (where b &amp; b's would be
more suitable, "garden tours", etc), a designation for areas that should be more
quiet, less intensive ag (including spraying toxic herbicides and pesticides from
airplanes, etc), etc ..

This bill lumps all ag endeavors and lifestyles into one which is not a realistic
or workable way to treat the many variations and opportunities which ag lands
present.

Mahalo for voting &quot;NO&quot; on this potentially dangerous bill.
