NEIL ABERCROMBIE
      Governor                                                           l "Y[..
                                                                          f~ H
                                                                                       RUSSELLS . KOKUBUN
                                                                                    Chairperson , Board of Agriculture

                                                                                        JAMES J. NAKATANI
                                                                                       Deputy to the Chairperson


                                                State of Hawaij
                                      DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                           1428 South King Street
                                        Honolu lu , Hawaii 96814-25 12



                          TESTIMONY OF RUSSELL S. KOKUBUN
                         CHAIRPERSON , BOARD OF AGRICULTURE

         BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT,
                 AGRICULTURE, AND WATER, LAND , AND HOUSING
                        THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 24 , 2011
                                  3:20 p.m.
                                  Room 225

                                   SENATE BILL NO. 631
                             RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY


   Chairs Gabbard , Nishihara, and Dela Cruz and Members of the Committees:


           Thank you for the opportunity to testify on Senate Bill 631 . The Department of
   Agriculture recognizes that achieving energy security along with food security are
   priorities of the Abercrombie Administration . We support such efforts to achieve both
   energy and food security in a manner that is complementary to existing law to the
   greatest extent possible. The Department of Agriculture has strong concerns that this
   measure, as written , is inconsistent with current statutes and may adversely impact
   productivity of agricultural lands in our State.


          We are concerned by the statement of purpose found in Section 1 (lines 14 to
   17) that allowing renewable energy facilities on agricultural lands " ... is consistent with
   the purposes, standards , and criteria for uses within agricultural lands ." Our reading of
   Chapter 205 is that the primary use of agricultural land is for agricultural production .
   Section 205-2(a)(3) establishes the boundaries of the Agricultural District with the
   provision that " ...the greatest possible protection shall be given to those lands with a
   high capacity for intensive cu ltivation ." Section 205-4.5(a) , further restricts the use of
   agricultural lands with "A" and "B" rated soils. While Chapter 205 also lists energy-
S8631
Page -2-


related permissible uses including wind energy facilities, biofuel processing facilities,
and agricultural-energy facilities, we point out that each of these energy-related
permissible uses is required to have a meaningful connection to agriculture,
compatibility with agricultural uses, or does not adversely affect agricultural land and
activities.


        This bill proposes two amendments to Chapter 205.
        1.    To permit solar facilities, currently restricted to "D" and "E" agricultural
              lands, on all Agricultural District lands, and
        2.    To authorize renewable energy production as a permitted use on "A" and
              "8" rated agricultural lands, regardless whether or not agricultural activity
              is the primary activity of the renewable energy facility, and not requiring
              feedstock for this facility to be sourced from production in Hawaii.


        Regarding solar facilities, the Department of Agriculture is greatly concerned that
allowing such facilities as a permissible use on all agricultural lands regardless of soil
classification and without being accessory to agricultural activities, may adversely affect
the availability of agricultural lands best suited for intensive agricultural production. We
note that Act 231 (SLH 2008) that established solar energy facilities as a permissible
use within the Agricultural District, purposefully limited this use for "marginal agricultural
lands" with Land Study 8ureau "D" and "E" ratings to avoid use of the higher productivity
rated agricultural lands.


        Regarding renewable energy facilities, the Department is also greatly concerned
about the proposed amendment to Section 205-4.5(a) (16) to allow agricultural-energy
facilities to be built on "A" and "8" rated agricultural land without the existing
requirement that "agricultural production occupy at least 90 percent of the land area
owned by the business operating the facility".
S8631
Page -3-


        We believe there should be a relationship between the renewable energy facility
and agricultural production if the facility is to be allowed on the best agricultural lands
and request that the ninety percent stipulation be retained.


        Thank you, again, for the opportunity to present testimony on this bill.
SB631_AGR_02-24-11_ENE-AGL-WLH
                                                                                L IE
Aloha,
Please accept this as testimony, in regards to SB631, to be heard on
2/ 24/ 11 at 3:20pm. The bill proposes to allow renewable energy project s to be
built on any parcel of land, regardless of the lands status. This bill is full
of holes that allow development of land previously reserved as agricultural land.
Land is the most important resource on an island and this bill would allow
unrestricted growth and development of that land. This is unacceptable, and
dangerous for the future. Stop looking to make money for business and
development and start thinking logically about the future. Stop being greedy
bastards and think about the larger picture. Growth and development on an island
is a very tricky process that requires careful planning, not broad sweeping,
dangerous strokes.
Mahalo for the time.

Devin Bennett
HPU GREEN Club (Pres.)
hpugreenclub@gmail.com
dbennett347@columbus.rr.com
