                               LAND USE COMMISSION
                                  MEETING MINUTES
                                January 13, 2016- 9:30 a.m.
                            Conference Rooms A & B - 2nd Floor
                             State Building, 3060 Eiwa Street
                                     Lihue, HI 96766




COMMISSIONERS PRESENT:            Edmund Aczon
                                  Chad McDonald
                                  Arnold Wong
                                  Kent Hiranaga
                                  Aaron Mahi
                                  Jonathan Scheuer
                                  Linda Estes
                                  Nancy Cabral

COMMISSIONERS EXCUSED:
                                  (There are currently 8 seated Commissioners out of 9
                                  positions)

LUC STAFF PRESENT:                Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer
                                  Diane Erickson, Deputy Attorney General
                                  Scott Derrickson, Staff Planner
                                  Riley Hakoda, Staff Planner/Chief Clerk

COURT REPORTER:                   Jean McManus



CALL TO ORDER

     Chair Aczon called the meeting to order at 9:38 a.m. and recognized former LUC
Commissioner Dennis Esaki.

APPROVAL OF MINUTES

      Chair Aczon asked if there were any corrections or additions to the December 7, 2015
and December 10, 2015 minutes. There were no corrections or comments. Commissioner Estes
moved to approve the minutes. Commissioner Mahi seconded the motion. The minutes were
unanimously approved by voice vote (8-0).
TENTATIVE MEETING SCHEDULE

Executive Officer Orodenker provided the following:

    •   The regular tentative meeting schedule has been distributed in the handout material for
        the Commissioners.
    •   The January 27th, 2016 meeting is a videoconference to adopt the form of the order for the
        Kauai Special Permit via videoconference.
    •   The February 10-11th, 2016 meeting is planned for a hearing on the 201H Ma`alaea
        Plantation docket on Maui and DR08-36 on Oahu.
    •   The February 24-25, 2016 meetings are planned for a site visit for the Ma`alaea Plantation
        docket.
    •   The March 9, 2016 meeting is for a follow-up status report for SP09-403 Waimanalo
        Gulch Sanitary Landfill.
    •   Pending dockets SP92-381 Waikaloa Development and A89-676 Queen Liliuokalani
        Trust are awaiting scheduling.
    •   Any questions or conflicts, please contact LUC staff.

Commissioner Scheuer suggested that the Commission do the site visit to Maalaea in the afternoon to
experience the windy conditions in the area. Mr. Orodenker responded that LUC staff would attempt to
schedule it at that time. There were no other questions or comments on the tentative meeting schedule.


ACTION--SP15-407 SOLARCITY CORPORATION , (Kaua`i)

  Chair Aczon stated that this was a meeting on Docket No. SP15-407 SOLARCITY
CORPORATION, (Kaua`i)) To consider a Special Permit for real property situated at Kapai`a,
Hanamaulu, Lihue, Kauai, Hawaii, identified by Kauai Tax Map Key No. (4) 3-8-002:002 (por).

APPEARANCES
Ben Matsubara, Esq. and Curtis Tabata, Esq., for Petitioner Solarcity PV, LLC(“LLC”)
Jodi Higuchi, Esq., for Kaua`i County Planning Department (“County”)
Ka`aina Hall, Deputy Planning Director, County
Bryan Yee, Esq. for State Office of Planning (“OP”)
Rodney Funakoshi, Land Use Administrator, OP

PUBLIC TESTIMONY- DOCKET NO. SP15-405
  Chair Aczon asked if there were any Public Witnesses who wished to testify.

PUBLIC WITNESSES
  1. Llen Rachap
            Mr. Rachap stated that he was a 16 year resident of Kaua`i and described why he
     supported the SP15-407 Petition.
                                                                                                         2
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 13, 2016
        There were no other public witnesses.

   Chair Aczon updated the record, and described the procedures for the hearing. There were
no questions or comments on the procedures

    Chair Aczon called for Petitioner to make its presentation.

PRESENTATIONS
Petitioner
        Mr Matusbara provided a background history and summary of the special permit
procedure and the Petition; and Mr. Tabata described the features of the proposed solar facility
project. They also described why the Petitioner submitted the Special Permit Application; and
argued why the Commission should grant the Petition; and why the Applicant’s proposed
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order should be positively considered.

    Commissioner Wong requested clarification on how the “battery pack” system would
operate and what security, fire containment and fire prevention measures would be in effect.
Mr Tabata described how the applicant intended to secure the project area, and what design
features were planned to contain and prevent fires.

    Commissioner Cabral requested clarification on how the possible battery leakage problems
would be handled, how much disturbance to the Petition Area land surface would occur, and
what kind of agricultural use was planned. Mr. Tabata described how battery leakage would be
handled, and stated that sheep would be grazed on the Petition Area surface with minimal
disturbance to the Petition Area land surface.

    Commissioner Scheuer requested clarification on what efforts there had been to address the
historic/cultural and traditional practices of the Petition Area. Mr. Tabata described how the
Applicant had addressed those matters after it had been determined that the Petition
Area had been in sugar cane production for over a hundred years.

        Commissioner Wong requested clarification on what considerations had been
made for flora/fauna and endangered species concerns. Mr. Tabata described the
mitigation measures taken in association with the panels that would be used and other
actions to protect endangered species.

    Chair Aczon asked if the Commissioners had any further questions. There were
none.

                                                                                                   3
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 13, 2016
COUNTY

     Chair Aczon asked if County had any comments. Ms. Higuchi replied that County had no
objections to the proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order
submitted by the Applicant.

     Commissioner Scheuer requested clarification from County on why a letter of credit rather
than a performance bond had been required of the Applicant and why County was the
approving authority to extend the permit beyond 35 years. Mr. Hall shared how County had
assessed the financial situation of the Applicant and decided that a letter of credit was
sufficient; and how County had determined that it should be the approving authority to grant a
permit extension.

    Commissioner McDonald asked if the County had considered using IAL designation for the
Petition Area land. Mr. Hall commented that the County had already conducted an Important
Agricultural Land (IAL) assessment of the island, but would need to check on why this
particular area had not been designated IAL.

OP

    Chair Aczon asked if OP had any comments. Mr. Yee presented OP’s position on the
Petition and described how OP generally supported the Application and what concerns OP had.

     Commissioner Estes requested clarification about the basis for OP’s concerns regarding Fish
& Wildlife (USFW). Mr. Yee described the results of OP’s communication with the USFW and
stated that he was not able to speak with respect to the County’s involvement.

        Commissioner Scheuer requested further clarification of the condition to delegate the

LUC authority to the County. Mr. Yee stated that OP did not support reducing the LUC’s
authority in such matters.

        Chair Aczon declared a recess at 10:45 a.m. and reconvened the meeting at 10:55 a.m.

        Chair Aczon sought the pleasure of the Commission. Commissioner Estes moved to

grant the special permit with modifications suggested by OP and LUC staff. Commissioner
Wong seconded the motion.

Discussion



                                                                                                 4
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 13, 2016
    Commissioner Scheuer stated that he was in favor of the motion and described why he
supported Commissioner Estes’ motion.

        There were no further questions or discussion.

        The Commission unanimously voted to grant the Petition (8-0- There are currently 8
seated Commissioners).


       Chair Aczon thanked the Applicant and County for providing a complete and detailed
record to the Commission; and to OP for providing its comments.

      Commissioner Wong remarked that Mr. Yee would be moving on to another post and
thanked him for his services to the LUC. The Commission applauded Mr. Yee.

EXECUTIVE SESSION

        Chair Aczon stated that the next agenda item was an Executive Session to consult with
Commission’s attorney on questions and issues pertaining to the Commission’s powers, duties,
privileges, immunities and liabilities with respect to 201H Hawaii Revised Statute hearings.
        There was no motion to enter into Executive Session.
        There being no further business, the meeting was adjourned by Chair Aczon at 11:02
a.m.




                                                                                                5
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 13, 2016
