                                LAND USE COMMISSION
                                  MEETING MINUTES

                                  January 27, 2016– 9:00 a.m.

    The Meeting was held at the following Video Conference Centers simultaneously:
O`ahu- Kalanimoku Building, 1151 Punchbowl St., Room B10, Honolulu, Hawai`i, 96813
Kaua`i – Līhu`e State Office Bldg., 3060 `Eiwa Street, Basement, Līhu`e, Hawai`i, 96766
Maui- State of Hawaii Department of Transportation District Office, 650 Palapala Dr., Kahului,
Hawai`i, 96732
Hawai`i- Hilo State Office Bldg., 75 Aupuni Street, Hilo, Hawai`i, 96720

COMMISSIONERS PRESENT:              Edmund Aczon (on Oahu)
                                    Aaron Mahi (on Oahu)
                                    Chad McDonald (on Oahu)
                                    Arnold Wong (on Oahu)
                                    Jonathan Scheuer (on Oahu)
                                    Nancy Cabral (on Hawai`i)
                                    Kent Hiranaga (on Maui)
                                    Linda Estes (on Kaua`i)

COMMISSIONERS EXCUSED:              (There are currently 8 seated Commissioners and 1
                                    vacant Commissioner position.)

LUC STAFF PRESENT:                  Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer (on Oahu)
                                    Diane Erickson, Deputy Attorney General(on Oahu)
                                    Scott Derrickson, Staff Planner (on Oahu)
                                    Riley Hakoda, Staff Planner/Chief Clerk (on Oahu)

COURT REPORTER:                     Holly Hackett (on Oahu)

CALL TO ORDER

       Chair Aczon called the meeting to order at 9:08 a.m. Commissioner Cabral
requested and was granted a moment of silence for the Commission to observe Senator
Gilbert Kahele’s passing.

MOTION TO CORRECT AGENDA
      Chair Aczon entertained a motion to correct the SP title on the agenda from
“SP15-54 Solarcity PV, LLC to SP15-407 Solarcity Corporation”.
      Commissioner Mahi moved to correct the SP title. Commissioner Wong
seconded the motion. By a voice vote the motion unanimously approved (8-0 excused).

APPROVAL OF MINUTES

      Chair Aczon asked if there were any corrections or additions to the January 13,
2016 minutes. There were none. Commissioner Estes moved to approve the minutes.
Commissioner Mahi seconded the motion. By a voice vote the minutes were
unanimously approved (8-0 excused).

TENTATIVE MEETING SCHEDULE

Executive Officer Orodenker provided the following:

    •   The regular tentative meeting schedule has been distributed in the handout
        material for the Commissioners.
    •   The February 9, 2016 meeting will be held in Kona to address SP92-381 Waikoloa
        Development Company’s application.
    •   The February 10, 2016 meeting will be held in Honolulu at the LUC conference room for
        DR08-36 Ko`olina Development LLC.
    •   February 24, 2016’s meeting will be on Maui to hear DR15-54 Pu`unoa Home Owners
        Association’s Petition.
    •   The March 8, 2016 meeting will be in Honolulu at the airport for a status report on SP99-
        403 Waimanalo Gulch Sanitary Landfill.
    •   March 23-24 is planned for A89-646 Queen Liliuokalani Trust in Kona at the West
        Hawaii Civic Center.
    •   The April 2016 meetings are planned for hearings on the Ma`alaea Plantation docket.
    •   Any questions or conflicts, please contact LUC staff
    •   Above dates represent the tentative calendar of meetings and are subject to
        change

    There were no questions and comments regarding the tentative meeting schedule.

ADOPTION OF ORDER
SP15-407 SOLARCITY CORPORATION (Kaua`i)
To consider a Special Permit for real property situated at Kapai`a, Hanamaulu, Līhu`e, Kaua`i,
Hawai`i, identified by Kaua`i Tax Map Key No. (4) 3-8-002:002 (por).


                                                                                                 2
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 27, 2016
APPEARANCES
Curtis Tabata, Esq. and Benjamin Matsubara, Esq., Solarcity Corporation’s
Representative (on Oahu)
Kaua`i County Planning Department (County) had reported that it would not be
appearing.
Brian Yee, Esq. for State of Hawaii Office of Planning (OP) (on Oahu)
Lorene Maki, Planner (OP) (on Oahu)

    Chair Aczon asked if there were any Public Witnesses who wished to testify.

PUBLIC WITNESSES

        There were no witnesses.

ADOPTION OF ORDER
   Chair Aczon updated the record, and described the procedures for the hearing.
There were no questions or comments on the procedures.

    Commissioner Scheuer expressed his concerns regarding a comment letter from the
Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) requesting that the LUC ask for additional
information from the County of Kaua`i Planning Department in order to discern
whether all of the proper procedures had been followed related to SHPD’s opportunity
to review and comment on the proposed project and whether the AIS for the proposed
project was adequate.

    Commissioner Scheuer moved for an Executive Session to discuss the Commission’s
powers, duties, privileges, immunities, and liabilities with the Commission’s Counsel.
Commissioner Wong seconded the motion. By a voice vote, the Commission voted
unanimously in favor of the motion (8-0). The Commission entered Executive Session
at 9:16 a.m. and reconvened at 9:38 a.m.

    Chair Aczon asked if the Applicant had any comments in regards to the OHA letter.

   Mr. Tabata responded that he had only received the OHA letter at the start of the
proceedings and had briefly reviewed it; but commented that the 2 sites mentioned in
the OHA letter were located within a tax map key area of approximately 5,300 acres and
were not in the 50 acre portion that was the Petition Area. Mr. Tabata elaborated on


                                                                                       3
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 27, 2016
why this was significant and why the late OHA letter should not affect the LUC’s
decision and continuing to adopt the form of the order.

   Chair Aczon entertained a motion to adopt the form of the order. Commissioner
Scheuer had a procedural question on how the proceedings would move forward that
was acknowledged and resolved. Commissioner Estes moved to approve the form of
the order subject to the proposed conditions by OP and County and as modified by
LUC staff. Commissioner Cabral seconded it.

Discussion on the Motion
       Commissioner Hiranaga asked if OP had any comments. Mr. Yee commented
that he had also only been made aware of the OHA letter prior to the start of the LUC
meeting and noted that Kaua`i Planning Commission (KPC) may not have been made
aware of the OHA letter as well; and that the County’s decision had been based on the
determination that an archeological inventory survey (AIS) was sufficient.

       Commissioner Hiranaga requested clarification on whether KPC should have
included OHA in its review on this matter. Mr. Tabata noted that KPC relied on the
“Walmart Case” and did not seek a SHPD review. Commissioner Hiranaga asked what
might happen if SHPD has an issue with the special permit. Commissioner McDonald
commented that OHA had submitted the letter, not SHPD, and OHA would be the
party having the issue with the special permit.

        Chair Aczon questioned who notifies OHA about LUC meetings. Mr. Orodenker
clarified the Special Permit process for the benefit of the Commission and described
how various individuals, agencies, departments and organizations were notified by the
LUC. Mr. Orodenker verified with Mr. Hakoda that OHA was included on the agenda
notice list used by the LUC.

        Commissioner Scheuer stated that he would be voting against the motion and
noted OHA’s pattern of making late submittals on LUC matters. Commissioner
Scheuer requested that the Executive Officer reach out to OHA and request that they
make more timely submittals. Mr. Orodenker acknowledged Commissioner Scheuer’s
request. Commissioner Scheuer commented further that the record from KPC was
silent to the issues raised by OHA and was concerned about the lack of findings in the
KPC record regarding cultural practices and traditions.




                                                                                         4
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 27, 2016
        Chair Aczon questioned whether KPC or the County had received the OHA
letter. Mr. Orodenker responded that he did not know since the OHA letter arrived via
email to the LUC at 4:30 p.m. on January 26th and there was no “cc” including them.

        Commissioner Estes stated that she was satisfied with KPC’s submittal and had
initiated her motion accordingly.

       Commissioner Wong stated his concerns about the late OHA letter and opined
that perhaps the matter should be further discussed with OHA. Commissioner Wong
then offered a friendly amendment to add a condition to inform SHPD and respond to
the OHA letter before the Special Permit was granted.

       Chair Aczon asked if Commissioners Estes and Cabral would accept the friendly
amendment. Commissioner Estes rejected it. Commissioner Cabral responded that she
was open to accepting the friendly amendment but stated her concerns for the need to
set time limits to SHPD’s response and reaction to the OHA letter in a specific condition
in order that the Special Permit could move forward.

       Commissioner Hiranaga asked if KPC had the right to determine whether or not
to notify SHPD; and what timeline and deadlines needed to be observed by the LUC.
Ms. Erickson described how County and the Commission should procedurally handle
Special Permits and what authorities each entity had. Mr. Orodenker also described
how the Commission needed to address Special Permits within a 45 day period or an
automatic approval with standard conditions would be granted to the Applicant.

      Commissioner Estes questioned if a motion for reconsideration was being put
forward. Chair Aczon responded that only the motion for approval of the form of the
order was being addressed.

       Further discussion occurred and Commissioner Estes commented that she could
withdraw her motion. Commissioner Cabral called for the question if the motion for
approval was being addressed. Commissioner Scheuer clarified his reasons for
opposing the motion and described why he felt that the KPC record was not sufficient
and lacked adequate findings.

       Chair Aczon reaffirmed with Commissioner Estes that she had not withdraw her
motion and asked if there was any further discussion on the motion adopting the form
of the order.

                                                                                        5
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 27, 2016
      Commissioner McDonald stated that although he understood Commissioner
Scheuer’s concerns, County and KPC had accepted the Applicant’s AIS and were
authorized to do so; and that he felt the record was complete and that the Special Permit
should be moved forward.

       Commissioner Wong added that he understood that County had additional AIS
requirements before grading on the Petition Area site could occur and agreed with
Commissioner McDonald in supporting the motion.

     Commissioner Hiranaga stated that he was an advocate for county homerule and
would be voting in favor of the motion since his understanding was that any
OHA/SHPD issues would be taken to County/KPC and not the LUC.

        Commissioner Mahi stated that he would be voting against the motion.

       Chair Aczon stated that he supported the motion and shared his disappointment
at how OHA’s late participation in the proceedings was disruptive and did not allow
for adequate consideration of OHA concerns during the Special Permit process.
       There was no further discussion or comments.

DECISION MAKING
      (As the Commission was set to be polled, audio/visual contact from the
videoconferencing site on Kaua`i was lost at 10:10 a.m. and restored at 10:11 a.m.)

       Discussion occurred to determine who was in attendance at the Kaua`i
videoconference meeting site. Chair Aczon discovered that Michael Belles, attorney for
Solarcity during its County proceedings was in attendance. Commissioner Estes
apologized for inadvertent conversation with Mr. Belles. Commissioner Mahi stated his
displeasure with the communication that had occurred between Commissioner Estes
and Mr. Belles. Chair Aczon acknowledged the incident and had the Commission
polled.

      The Commission voted as follows:
Yea: Commissioners Estes, Cabral, Wong, McDonald, Hiranaga and Chair Aczon.
Nay: Commissioners Scheuer and Mahi.
      The Motion passed 6-2 (8 seated Commissioners, 1 vacant seat).


                                                                                       6
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 27, 2016
       Commissioner Scheuer requested that LUC staff ensure that future agendas
provide for addressing any legislative action that the LUC might need to take during
the 2016 Hawaii Legislative Session. Mr. Orodenker acknowledged Commissioner
Scheuer’s request.

      With no further action or other business, Chair Aczon declared the meeting
adjourned at 10:17 a.m.




                                                                                       7
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
January 27, 2016
