                              BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION
                                  OF THE STATE OF HAWAI'I

                              BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                  OF THE STATE OF HAWAI'I
                                                                                                     Q .5

In the Matter of the Application of       )     Docket No. SP15-407
                                          )
SOLARCITY CORPORATION                     )     FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLIZÿoNS ÿ:-
                                          )     OF LAW, AND DECISION ANI3a                          :ÿ"
For a Special Use Permit to Establish     )     ORDER APPROVING THE
a Solar Energy Facility on                )     RECOMMENDATION OF THE
approximately 50 acres of Land            )     COUNTY OF IÿUA'I PLANNING
within the State Land Use Agricultural    )     COMMISSION TO APPROVE THE
District at Kapaia, Hanamÿ'ulu, Lihu'e,   )     STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT
Kaua'i, Hawai'i, Tax Map Key              )     APPLICATION WITH
(4) 3-8-002:002.                          )     MODIFICATIONS
                                          )

               FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION
             AND ORDER APPROVING THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE
             COUNTY OF ICAUA'I PLANNING COMMISSION TO APPROVE
        THE STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION WITH MODIFICATIONS



                                               This is to certify that this is a true and correct
                                               copy of the document on file in the office of the
                                               State Land Use Commission, Honolulu, Hawai'i.




                                                  1/29/16                        by




                                                  I          " /     j/        ÿo_
                                              (.,/
                                               Dgfiiel E. Orodenker, Executive Officer




SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
                                                   Y
                                           26-\ÿ




                             BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION
                                  OF THE STATE OF HAWAI'I

                             BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                  OF THE STATE OF HAWAI'I

In the Matter of the Application of           )       Docket No. SP15-407
                                              )
SOLARCITY CORPORATION                         )       FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS
                                              )       OF LAW, AND DECISION AND
For a Special Use Permit to Establish         )       ORDER APPROVING THE
a Solar Energy Facility on                    )       RECOMMENDATION OF THE
approximately 50 acres of Land                )       COUNTY OF KAUA'I PLANNING
within the State Land Use Agricultural        )       COMMISSION TO APPROVE THE
District at Kapaia, Hanamg'ulu, L1hu'e,       )       STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT
Kaua'i, Hawai'i, Tax Map Key                  )       APPLICATION WITH
(4) 3-8-002:002.                              )       MODIFICATIONS
                                              )

               FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION
             AND ORDER APPROVING THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE
             COUNTY OF KAUA'I PLANNING COMMISSION TO APPROVE
        THE STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION WITH MODIFICATIONS


        The State of Hawai'i Land Use Commission ("LUC"), having examined the complete

record of the County of Kaua'i Planning Commission ("Planning Commission") proceedings on

the State Special Use Permit ("SUP") Application ("Application") filed by SolarCity Corporation

("Applicant"), to construct a solar energy facility and accessory uses and structures ("Project") on

approximately 50 acres of land in the State Land Use Agricultural District ("Petition Area")

identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key No. (4) 3-8-002:002 in Kapaia, Hanamÿ'ulu, Lihu'e, Kaua'i,

Hawai'i ("Master Lot"), and upon consideration of the matters discussed therein, at its meeting on




                                                                                                  2
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
January 13, 2016, hereby makes the following findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision

and order:

                                      FINDINGS OF FACT

PROCEDURAL MATTERS

1. On September 30, 2015, Applicant filed the Application with the County of Kaua'i Planning

      Department ("County") (Special Permit No. SP-2016-2), pursuant to section 205-6, Hawai'i

      Revised Statutes ("HRS"), and section 15-15-95 et seq., Hawai'i Administrative Rules

       ("HAR").

2. On October 27, 2015, the Planning Commission considered the Petition. There was no public

      testimony at the hearing. After due deliberation, the Planning Commission recommended

      approval of the Application to the LUC, subject to eleven conditions.

3. On December 9, 2015, the LUC received a copy of the decision and the record of the Planning

      Commission's proceedings on the Application and assigned it Docket No. SP15-407.

4. On January 5, 2016, The LUC mailed the notice and meeting agenda for the January 13, 2016

      meeting in Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i to the parties and the Statewide and Kaua'i mailing lists.

5. On January 6, 2016, the LUC mailed an amended notice and meeting agenda to all parties

      and the Statewide and Kaua'i mailing lists.

6. On January 6, 2016, the LUC received the Office of Planning's ("OP") comment letter on

      SP15-407.

7. On January 8, 2016, Applicant filed its Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and

      Decision and Order Approving the County of Kaua'i Planning Commission's

      Recommendation ("Proposed Order").




SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
 8. On January 13, 2016, the LUC met in Lihu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, to consider the Petition.

       Benjamin Matsubara, Esq. and Curtis Tabata, Esq. appeared on behalf of the Applicant;

       Deputy Plalming Director Ka'ÿina Hull and Jodi Higuchi, Esq., Deputy Corporation Counsel,

       appeared on behalf of the County; and, Rodney Funakoshi and Deputy Attorney General

       Bryan Yee. appeared on behalf of the Office of Planning, State of Hawai'i ("OP"). The

       Commission heard public testimony from one individual, Mr. Llen Rachap; and, from Mr.

       Yee on behalf of OP. At the meeting the Applicant provided a description of the Project

      relative to SUP guidelines under Section 15-15-95 (c), HAR. Following the presentation by

      the Applicant, the LUC raised questions about the operation of the Project and its impacts.

       The County provided a brief overview of its decision recommending approval of the

      Application and the conditions it imposed. OP summarized its position on the Petition as

      well as its written COlmnents on the Applicant's Proposed Order. The Applicant stated that

      it agreed to all the conditions proposed by OP.

      Thereafter, a motion was made and seconded to approve the Application and the County's

      recommendation, with modifications as proposed by OP and the LUC, and as agreed to by

      the Applicant.

9. On January 19, 2016, the LUC mailed out the agenda and notice of hearing for the January

      27, 2016, LUC video-conference meeting to all parties, and the Statewide and Kaua'i mailing

      lists.

10. On January 27, 2016, the LUC conducted a meeting to adopt the form of the Order on this

      docket via simultaneous video-conferencing at the following: Kalanimoku Building

      (Honolulu, O'ahu), Lÿhu'e State Office Building (Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i), State DOT District Office

      (Kahului, Maul), and Hilo State Office Building (Hilo, Hawai'i). Entering appearances were



SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
      Benjamin Matsubara, Esq. and Curtis Tabata, Esq. for Applicant; and Deputy Attorney

      General Bryan Yee, Esq. and Rodney Funakoshi for OP. In attendance on Kaua'i, one

      member of the public attended: Michael Belles. The Commission provided an opportunity

      for public testimony. There was no public testimony.




DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPERTY

1. The property which is the subject matter of this Application is described as an approximately

      fifty (50) acre portion of Lot l-A-3 located in Kapaia, Hanamfi'ulu, Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i,

      identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key No. (4) 3-8-002:002 ("Master Lot"). The Petition Area

      contains approximately 50ÿ acres and the Master Lot contains 5,341.493 acres.

2. Grove Farm Company, Incorporated, a Hawai'i corporation, is the owner of the Master Lot.

3. The Petition Area has been used for agricultural purposes in the past, including sugar cane

      cultivation, cattle and livestock pasture and seed corn cultivation. The Petition Area has

      most recently been used for seed corn cultivation.

4. The Petition Area lies to the west of Hanamÿ'ulu Town and is undeveloped. There are no

      existing buildings or structures on the Petition Area. The Kaua'i Island Utility Cooperative's

      ("KIUC") Kapaia power plant is located across the road fi'om, and to the east of, the Petition

      Area. For the past 100 years, agricultural activities on the Petition Area have included

      sugarcane cultivation, cattle raising, and most recently seed corn cultivation. A private,

      paved Cane Haul Road (which extends from Mÿ'alo Road, Highway 583, a State highway)

      provides access along the eastern boundary of the Petition Area. With the exception of the

      KIUC power plant and the Kaua'i Sporting Clays facility (a skeet shooting range), the

      surrounding area is primarily rural, dominated by a mixture of agricultural uses.




SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
 5. The Master Lot is located adjacent to, or within 300 feet of, the properties identified on the

       Adjacent Propelÿy Index which include Grove Farm Company, Incorporated, University of

       Hawai'i, KIUC, County of Kaua'i Office of the County Attorney, and the State of Hawai'i

       Agribusiness Development Corporation.

6. The Petition Area is composed of gently sloping lands (3% - 8%) in an area generally lying

      north of Lihu'e and west of Hanamg'ulu Town across the road from, and to the west of,

      KIUC's Kapaia power plant. The Petition Area is located approximately 285-295 feet above

      sea level. To the south of the Petition Area are the Hanamÿ'ulu Stream and the De Mello

      Reservoir.


7. The Petition Area receives approximately 60 to 80 inches of rainfall annually.

8. According to the Federal Insurance Rate Map (Map No. 1500020307E), the Petition Area is

      located in Flood Zone X, which is an area determined to be outside of the 500 year flood

      plain.

9. The Petition Area is located in the State Land Use Agricultural District. The Petition Area

      has been located in the State Land Use Agricultural District since the inception of the State

      Land Use Districts. The Petition Area has not been designated as Important Agricultural

      Lands under Part III of HRS chapter 205 ("IAL").

10. The Petition Area is located in the Kaua'i General Plan Agriculture Land Use Designation.

      The Petition Area has been consistently located in an Agriculture designation or

      classification under prior General Plans.

11. The Petition Area has been located in the County of Kaua'i Comprehensive Zoning

      Ordinance ("CZO") Agriculture District since the adoption of the CZO.




                                                                                                 6
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
 12. The Petition Area is located within the Lihu'e Development Plan Area. The Petition Area

       has always been located within the Lÿhu'e Development Plan Axea since the original

       adoption of the original Lÿhu'e Development Plan (Ordinance No. 335, November 29, 1977),

       which was recently updated by the Lÿhu'e Community Plan (Ordinance No. 989, June 22,

       2015).

 13. None of the Petition Area is located within the Special Management Area ("SMA") of the

       County of Kaua'i.

 14. There are no existing violations of any land use laws or regulations on the Petition Area.

 15. The Petition Area is not subject to any land use conditions.




       DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED USE

16.    The Project will be located on a 46.5 acre portion of the Petition Area. It will consist of an

       approximately 17 Mega Watt-Direct Current (MW-dc)/13 Mega Watt-Alternating Cun'ent

      (MW-ac) ground-mount solar PV system, coupled with a 13 MW-ac/52 Mega Watt hour

      (MWh) Battery Energy Storage System (BESS), and related intercoimection and ancillary

      facilities. The interconnection facilities will include a dedicated 12.47 kilovolt (kV)

      overhead infrastructure that will run from the Project site, located directly adjacent to the

      KIUC's existing Kapaia power plant and switchyard, to a generator step-up transformer

      located on KIUC property just outside the Kapaia switchyard footprint. The generator will

      convert the power generated into utility-quality power, which will tie into KIUC's existing

      transmission system. Additional communication connections and equipment will be

      installed to interface with KIUC's supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system




                                                                                                   7
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       so that the energy generated by the Project can be remotely controlled and dispatched by

       KIUC. The Project site will be surrounded by a seven-foot tall chain link security fence.

17.    The chal"ÿ below summarizes the Project dimensions and overall ground disturbance

       associated with major permanent Project features.


        Approximate Solar Project Component Dimensions
                                   Solar PV System Battery Energy Storage System                TOTAL
              Height                    77"                             86"                   ---
               Width                   1.6"                              52"                  ---
              Length                    39"                              38"                  ---

   Number of Units Installed              54,285 panels              520 batteries              --
        Total Surface Area                45.85 acres                 0.65-acre               46.50
  Total Ground Disturbance                 < 1 acre                  0.65-acre            < 2 acres
  (new impervious surface)


         (i) The proposed ground-mounted solar PV system will be approximately 6.5 feet (77

               inches) in height at its highest point. Each panel is roughly 1.6 inches in width by

               3.2 feet (39 inches) in length, and approximately 54,285 total panels will be installed.

               Given that panels will be spaced to allow infiltration of runoff through sheet flow,

               the total amount of new impervious surface from the PV system will be minimal (less

               than 1 acre). Accordingly, while the overall surface area of the panels will be

               approximately 45.85 acres, less than 1 acre of new ground disturbance will occur as

               a result of the PV system installation.

        (ii) The BESS units will be approximately 7.2 feet (86 inches) in height, and each BESS

              unit is roughly 4.3 feet (52 inches) in width by 3.2 feet (38 inches) in length.

              Approximately 520 BESS units will be installed, requiring a total area of

               approximately 0.65-acre.


        (iii) The combined surface area required for the PV system and the BESS is 46.5 acres,

                                                                                                     8
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
              while less than two (2) acres of new impervious surface will result from the solar

              Project. The two acres of impervious surface will add only a small fraction of the

              total land coverage allowed on the Master Lot.

18.   Project construction and commissioning is proposed to commence in March or April 2016

      and is anticipated to be completed so as to allow full-scale commercial operation in the fourth

      quarter of 2016.

19.   The general sequence of construction will be to install sediment and erosion control

      measures, install posts, underground electrical conduit and wire, solar panel racking, panel

      installation, array wiring, battery storage array, and finally, electrical equipment installation

      and connection. The posts will be installed via hydraulic driver to a predetermined depth

      according to soil conditions. The posts are structural and will not generally require the

      addition of concrete footers for foundations. The solar racking spans the posts, and the panels

      bolt to the racking to form the array. The terminus of each an'ay will include an

      approximately two-foot wide and three-foot deep trench for the conduit providing

      underground electrical connection to the power inverters and BESS. All wiring will be

      performed and inspected to National Electric Code and best industry practices. Trench

      excavation will be performed with a backhoe and trench backfilling will be done with the

      excavated, native soil, and compacted to design specifications in order to prevent sinldng.

      Disturbed soil will be stabilized and seeded per sediment and erosion control plans and

      applicable state environmental guidelines. In addition to post drivers and baclchoes as noted

      above, typical construction equipment will include all-terrain forldifts, skidsteer with fork

      attachments for unloading and dispersing material, and other equipment as necessary.

20.   The solar panels will be elevated on structural posts, minimizing new impervious area. Due




SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       to the topography of the site, no major earthwork is anticipated. The total land occupied by

      the Project will be approximately 46.5 acres (less than 1 percent) of the total area of the

      Master Lot. This includes temporary disturbance for underground electrical conduit along

      with the proposed permanent impervious surface. The overall permanent disturbance to the

       site will be minimal given that the proposed solar panels are mounted on structural posts with

      a racking system. The proposed development will add less than two (2) acres of new

      impervious surface, which will consist of the solar panel mounting posts, transformer pads,

      battery storage area, and fence posts. Because of the small amount of increase in impervious

      area, the storm water runoff characteristics will not be significantly altered.

21.   In order to mitigate visual impacts, landscaping will be installed and maintained around the

      Project as may be necessary to screen it when viewed from Mfi'alo Road.

22.   The Project site is level and will require minimal grading. Some grading may be required for

      interior service roads. The Applicant will obtain all necessary grading permits.

23.   After construction and commissioning, the system will operate with minimal servicing and

      maintenance.


24.   Metering equipment will send performance and production data to continuously monitored

      servers. The Applicant's software will notify its Operations & Maintenance team if the

      system is underperforming, after which a teclmician can be dispatched as required. These

      occurrences are infrequent and typically consist of one technician for service and repair.




      NEED FOR THE PROJECT

25.   The proposed Project will provide the key benefit of improving electric grid stability by

      enabling KIUC to utilize stored energy from the BESS to help meet KIUC's afternoon and



                                                                                                   l0
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       evening peak demand. KIUC intends to use approximately 80%-85% of the output from the

      PV system to charge the BESS, such that KIUC will be able to dispatch the stored energy to:

       (1) help with ramping towards KIUC's afternoon!evening peak (which will avoid or reduce

      the need for KIUC to ramp up its conventional oil-fueled units), and (2) shave the evening

      peak, avoiding or reducing the need to dispatch KIUC's most inefficient conventional oil-

      fueled unit(s).

26. The projected reduction in oil use will result in significant cost savings for KIUC and its

      members/customers. KIUC anticipates that once the Project is placed into service, KIUC

      and its members/customers will use approximately 37,474 fewer barrels of oil annually.

      KIUC estimates that this would result in $12.8 to $52.6 million (net present value) in total

      savings over the 20-year term of the power purchase agreement with KIUC.

27. The Project will also provide benefits to human health and envirolnnent through the use of

      an alternative "green" energy source that does not generate greenhouse gases and does not

      result in water contamination or other environmental impacts often associated with fossil

      fuel-generated energy production. The energy generated will assist KIUC in achieving the

      State of Hawai'i's Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), as set forth in section 269-91, HRS,

      et seq. It will also be consistent with KIUC's 2013-2025 Strategic Plan to move towards

      energy independence and decreased reliance on foreign imported oil by meeting at least 50%

      of KIUC's annual electricity sales with energy generated by renewable resources by the year

      2023.

28. The construction and maintenance of the system will benefit the public as a whole and

      support the local economy through increased tax revenues, reduced unemployment, and an

      increase in the sale of local goods and services. The Applicant and KIUC have entered imo



                                                                                               11
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       a Power Purchase Agreement. By its terms, KIUC will purchase the electrical power

       generated by the solar Project over a twenty (20) year period.

29.    In addition to the SUP, the Project will require a Use Permit pursuant to CZO Section 8-3.2

       for the construction of the Project, and issuance of a Class IV Zoning Permit as a condition

       of the Use Permit approval pursuant to CZO Section 8-8.4(4).




       IMPACTS UPON THE RESOURCES OF THE AREA

       Agricultural Resources

30.    The soils within the Petition Area are Puhi Silty Clay Loam. These soils are described as

       follows:

       "Puhi Series
             This series consists of well-drained soils on uplands on the island of Kaua'i.
         These soils developed in material derived from basic igneous rock. They are nearly
         level to steep. Elevations range from 175 to 500 feet. The annual rainfall anaounts
         to 60 to 80 inches. The mean annual soil temperature is 73° F. Puhi soils are
         geographically associated with Lÿhu'e and Kapa'a soils.
             These soils are used for sugarcane, pineapple, truck crops, orchards, pasture,
         woodland, wildlife habitat, water supply, and homesites. The natural vegetation
         consists of guava, Java plum, pangolagrass, kikuyugrass, elephantopus, joee,
        yellow foxtail, and rhodomylÿus.

            Puhi silty clay loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes (PnB).--On this soil, runoff is slow
        and the erosion hazard is slight.
            This soil is used for sugarcane, pineapple, orchards, pasture, truck crops, and
        homesites. (Capability classification Ile, irrigated or nonin'igated; sugarcane group
        1; pineapple group 5, pasture group 8; woodland group 7).

            Puhi silty clay loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes (PnC).-- On this soil, runoff is
        slow and the erosion hazard is slight.
            This soil is used for sugarcane, pineapple, pasture, and orchards. (Capability
        classification IIle, irrigated or nonirrigated; sugarcane group 1; pineapple group 6;
        pasture group 8; woodland group 7)."

31. The Petition Area includes soils classified by the Land Study Bureau, University of Hawai'i.

      The Over-all Productivity Rating for lands within the Petition Area is Class B (B78).

                                                                                                12
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
32. The Applicant will lease the usable portions of the Petition Area for the pasturing of sheep

       and/or goats at rates which are at least 50% below the fair market rental value as required by

       section 205-4.5(a)(21)(A), HRS.

33. At the end of the life of the Project (approximately 25 to 30 years) Applicant will

      decommission and restore the site to pre-existing conditions, enabling future agricultural uses

      of the Petition Area.

      Archaeological and Cultural Resources

34. An Archaeological Inventory Surface Survey (AISS) Report was prepared by Cultural

      Surveys Hawai'i, Inc. for the Petition Area.

35. The AISS was prepared by performing a historical and archaeological background research,

      a complete (100%) systematic pedestrian inspection of the Petition Area to identify any

      potential surface historic properties, as appropriate consultation with knowledgeable

      individuals regarding the Petition Area's past, and as appropriate laboratory work to process

      collected samples.

36. The Petition Area was entirely within the Lÿhu'e Plantation Company sugarcane fields,

      resulting in grading and repeated plowing of the land surface. Extensive portions of the

      Petition Area appear to have been in seed corn production for some time.

37. Two minor remnants of Lÿhu'e Plantation infrastructure were identified including a cane haul

      road and a remnant ditch.          Cultural Surveys Hawai'i's project specific effect

      recommendation is "no historic properties affected." The proposed Project will not adversely

      affect any significant historic properties located within the Project's Area of Potential Effect,

      based on the lack of cultural subsurface deposits observed in the field. Accordingly, no

      further archaeological Wol'k is recommended within the Project area.



                                                                                                    13
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
38. The County of Kaua'i Planning Department reviewed the AISS and concurred that no

      historic properties wilt be affected by the Project and therefore determined that the State

      Historic Properties Division ("SHPD") does not need to be advised of the Project.

39. The Project will have no impact on any known traditional or customary practices of native

      Hawaiians. There are no known traditional or customary practices of native Hawaiians that

      are presently occurring within the Petition Area that will be affected by the Project. There

      are no special gathering practices taking place within the polÿion of the Petition Area where

      the Project will be built that will be affected. The Project will not detrimentally affect: access

      to any streams; access to the shoreline or other adjacent shoreline areas; or gathering along

      any streams, the shoreline or in the ocean. There are no known religious practices taking

      place within the portion of the Petition Area where the Project will be built. The Project will

      have no negative impact on any cultural or historic sites or resources located within the

      Petition Area.

      Flora and Fauna

40. Rana Biological Consulting and LeGrande Biological Surveys, Inc. prepared a Flora and

      Fauna Survey assessment of the Petition Area.

41. The existing state of botanical resources and wildlife have been heavily compromised by

      past and present agricultural uses on the Master Lot and Petition Area. As a result, there do

      not appear to be any mammalian or avian species or botanical resources that will be

      endangered by the Project. The habitat cun'ently present on the Petition Area is comprised

      of former sugarcane lands which have been used for various diversified agricultural purposes

      since the closure of sugarcane operations in the area. The vegetation is dominated almost

      to the exclusion of native species by alien introduced grasses and weedy species. Terrestrial



                                                                                                     14
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       anammals present on the Petition Area and within the vicinity are likewise alien species.

       There is the possibility that the endemic endangered Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus

      semotus) overflies the Petition Area and possibly forages for insects on a seasonal basis

       above the Petition Area. Avian species present on the Project site are likewise prominently

       alien species, though there is the possibility that the endangered Nÿnÿ (Branta sandvicensis)

      may use resources within the Petition Area on a seasonal basis. There are no resident seabirds

      on the Petition Area, though both the threatened Newell's Shearwater (Puffinus newel) and

      the endangered Hawaiian Petrel (Pterodroma sandwichensis) have been recorded overflying

      the general Petition Area area on an almual basis during the nesting season.




      Groundwater Resources


42.   The solar Project will have no well facilities, and will have no impact on groundwater

      resources.




      Visual Resources

43. The Petition Area is located within the "Open Space, Parks, Agriculture, Conservation"

      Heritage Resources Designation ("Open Space H.R. Designation") (Kaua'i General Plan,

      November 2000). These Maps document the Heritage Resources of Kaua'i, including

      mountains, stream valleys and gulches, bluffs and other coastal features. Within the Open

      Space H.R. Designation are landforms that may have ecological, recreational, cultural and

      scenic values. In the case of the Petition Area, only its scenic values would have importance.

44. The proposed Project will be located on a relatively level portion of the Petition Area. The

      public view of the Project will be from parts of Mÿ'alo Road (which is a Scenic Roadway


                                                                                                 15
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       Con'idor). All structures will be designed to the extent possible to blend harmoniously into

      the surrounding environment. Building materials and exterior colors will be compatible with

      the surrounding environment. All of the structures will be landscaped so as to minimize

      visual impacts.




      ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS

      Chapter 343ÿ HRS

45.   The Project is not subject to the provisions of chapter 343, HRS. Chapter 343, HRS, requires

      the preparation of an Enviromnental Assessment and/or an Environmental Impact Statement

      for certain activities as specified in section 343-5, HRS. The proposed Project does not fall

      within such specified activities, in that the Project does not:

        a. Propose the use of state or county lands or the use of state or county funds;

        b. Propose any use within any land classified as conservation district by the State Land
            Use Commission under chapter 205, HRS;

        c. Propose any use within the shoreline area as defined in section 205A-41, HRS;

        d. Propose any use within any historic site as designated in the National Register or
            Hawaii Register as provided for in the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, Public Law
            89-665, or chapter 6E, HRS;

        e. Propose any use within the Waikiki area of Oahu, the boundaries of which are
            delineated in the land use ordinance as amended, establishing the "Waikiki Special
            District";

        f. Propose any amendments to existing county general plans where such amendment
             would result in designations other than agriculture, conservation, or preservation;

        g.   Propose any reclassification of any land classified as conservation
               district by the State land Use Commission under chapter 205, HRS;

        h.   Propose the construction of new, or the expansion or modification
              of existing, helicopter facilities within the state; or



                                                                                                16
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
         i. Propose the construction of a wastewater treatment unit, waste-to-energy facility, oil
              refinery, or power generating facility (which use petroleum based fuels).

       Air Quality
                    i
46. The Project will have little or no impact on the air quality in the area. Air quality may be

       affected at a very minimal level during the development activities. All vehicles or equipment

      used by the Applicant during construction will be properly muffled, housed and maintained

      to reduce any emission impacts. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and State of

      Hawaii air quality standards will not be exceeded.

      Noise

47. During operation, the solar panels are silent. The solar inverters are also very quiet, emitting

      less than 50 a-weighted decibels (dBA) at 3 meters (less than 10 feet), which is approximately

      the loudness of a conversation. All vehicles or equipment used by the Applicant during

      construction will be properly muffled, housed and maintained to reduce any noise impacts.

      Water Qualiÿ

48. The Project will not need to withdraw water from, and will have no impact on, any streams,

      including but not limited to, the Hanamÿ'ulu Stream (located to the west and south of the

      Petition Area).




      SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACTS

49.   The Project will have the following economic impacts:

        a. Jobs. The construction activities associated with the Project will result in 75 to 100

              jobs. Thereafter, existing employees of the Applicant will operate the solar Project.

        b. Housing. The Project will not result in the need for additional worker housing. Once

              construction is complete, the solar Project will be operated by the Applicant's

                                                                                                 J_7
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
               employees, who will be Kaua'i residents who are already living on Kaua'i.

         C.    Property Values. Since the fair market value of real property is based on the value of

               the land and physical improvements, the completion of the Project will increase the

               value of the Petition Area. This will result in increased real property taxes on the

               Petition Area, which will directly benefit the County of Kaua'i. However, it will not,

               in and of itself, have a material impact on the value of, or real property taxes assessed

               against, sun'ounding properties.


         d°    Population. The Project will not result in any increase in population.




      ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES

      Roadways

50. The major roads which service the Petition Area are Mÿ'alo Road (Highway 583), a State

      highway, and a private, paved Cane Haul Road. The Project, in and of itself, will not

      significantly increase traffic on these roads.

      Water

51. The Project will not need potable water. To the extent needed, water for the Project site will

      be obtained froln the in'igation system operated by the Owner on and adjacent to the Project

      site.


      Drainage

52. The Petition Area is situated within Flood Zone X (areas outside of 500 year flood plain), as

      shown on the County of Kaua'i's flood insurance rate map (Flood Insurance Rate Map

      150002-0307E). The Project will be located within Flood Zone X. The Project will meet all

      of the requirements of the Flood Plain Management Ordinance of the County of Kaua'i, as



                                                                                                     18
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       contained in Chapter 15, Article 1, of the Kaua'i County Code, 1987. The Project will have

       no impact on flooding on or around the Petition Area. All drainage resulting from

       construction activities, fi'om agricultural activities, and from the increase in land coverage

       will be retained on site and subject to best management practices. No new surface water

       flows will be discharged into the Hanamg'ulu Stream or the De Mello Reservoir.

53. Best Management Practices of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

       ("NPDES") will be applied before construction. Practices that will be included on the Project

       will include but not be limited to self-pads, stabilized construction entrance, revegetation for

       erosion control, gravel bags as necessary for silt control, and temporary silt basin.

54. There will be a retention basin to retain any increased flow on the Petition Area. The quality

       and quantity of water leaving the Petition Area should be the same as prior to construction.

      Wastewater

55. The Project will not utilize or need an Individual Wastewater System ("IWS"). If necessary,

      the Applicant will use portable toilets approved by the State Department of Health.

      Solid Waste

56. Solid waste collection will be provided by private means. Solid waste will be taken to the

      County of Kauai's transfer stations for disposal in the County of Kauai's landfill.

      Police and Fire Protection

57. Fire and police services in the vicinity are located in Lÿhu'e, approximately five (5) miles

      from the Petition Area. The development of the Petition Area will not significantly increase

      the need for existing fire and police services.

      Schools




                                                                                                   19
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
58.    The closest schools are Wilcox Elementary School and Kaua'i High School located in LThu'e

       and King Kaumuali'i Middle School located in Hanamg'ulu. The Project will not generate

       any additional em'ollment.



       CONFORMANCE WITH THE COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMEN PROGRAM

59.   The Project generally conforms the applicable objectives, policies, and guidelines of the

       Coastal Zone Management program under chapter 205A, HRS.



      CONFORMANCE WITH THE SPECIAL PERMIT GUIDELINES

60. Special Permit Requirements. The proposed Project will meet with the requirements for a

      Special Permit, as contained in section 205-6, HRS, and in section 15-15-95, HAR, et seq.

      as set forth herein.

61. The use will not be contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished by the chapters 205

      and 205A, HRS, and the LUC's administrative rules. The proposed Project will not interfere

      with other agricultural uses which are generally allowed within the State Land Use ("SLU")

      Agricultural District. It is consistent with solar facility uses which are allowed (with a

      Special Permit) in the SLU Agricultural District. It is also located so as to minimize impacts

      on agricultural activities in this area. The proposed Project is consistent with the objectives

      to protect and conserve natural resources and foster intelligent, effective, and orderly land

      allocation and development.

62. The desired use will not adversely affect surrounding property. As discussed herein, the

      proposed use will be compatible with the sun'ounding neighborhood and uses, and will not

      generate any significant adverse impacts. It will not prevent sun'ounding lands from being

      used for agricultural purposes. The amount of additional traffic that will be generated as a



                                                                                                  2O
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
      result of the proposed Project will be insignificant and will not create any substantial adverse

      impacts. The proposed Project is an exceptional situation where the desired use would not

      change the essential character of the district nor be inconsistent therewith.

63.   The use will not um'easonablv burden public agencies to provide roads and streets, sewers,

      water, drainage and school improvements, and police and fire protection. As discussed

      herein, no burden will be placed on public agencies to provide additional facilities, services,

      and utilities as a result of the proposed Project. Conversely, by providing an alternative green

      source of energy for electricity, it will promote the sustainability and availability of electrical

      production resources for the public. The proposed Project is a reasonable use of the Petition

      Area, a portion of the Master Lot.

64.   Unusual conditions, trends and needs have arisen since the district boundaries and

      regulations were established. The State has recently recognized the need to promote

      alternative energy production, including solar energy production. Such facilities require

      large areas, as are available in the SLUC Agricultural District compared to the SLUC Urban

      District. Provided such new uses do not adversely impact surrounding agricultural activities,

      they are recognized as necessary and permissible in the SLUC Agricultural District. The

      proposed Project is an unusual and reasonable use of the Petition Area.

65.   The land on which the proposed use is sought is unsuited for the uses permitted with the

      district. Although the portion of the Master Lot identified for the proposed Project is suitable

      for agricultural uses, it is better suited at this time for alternative energy production in

      conjunction with suitable agricultural uses via the proposed Project. The Petition Area,

      including the Project site, will be made available for suitable agricultural uses during the life

      of the Project.



                                                                                                     21
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
                        RULINGS ON PROPOSED FINDINGS OF FACT



        Any of the proposed findings of fact submitted by the Applicant not already ruled upon by

the LUC by adoption, or rejected by clearly contrary findings of fact, are hereby denied and

rejected.

        Any conclusions of law herein improperly designated as a finding of fact should be deemed

or construed as a conclusion of law; and finding of fact herein improperly designated as a

conclusion of law should be deemed or construed as a finding of fact.




                                   CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

 ,    The LUC has jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to section 205-6, HRS, and section 5-15-

      95 et seq. HAR.

 ,    Based upon the record of the proceedings before the Planning Connnission, and pursuant to

      section 205-6, HRS and section 15-15-95 et seq., HAR, the LUC finds that the

      recommendation of the Planning Commission to approve a State Special Permit for the

      Petition Area, consisting of approximately 50 acres of land in the State Land Use Agricultural

      District identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key No. (4) 3-8-002:002 in Kapaia, Hanamÿ'ulu,

      Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, generally meets the guidelines for determining an "unusual and

      reasonable use" and "would promote the effectiveness and objectives" of chapter 205, HRS,

      within the State Land Use Agricultural District.

 °    The Project constitutes an unusual and reasonable use within the agricultural district other

      than those for which the district is classified, and complies with section 205-6(a), HRS.


                                                                                                  22
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
4. The Project constitutes an exceptional situation where the proposed use would not change

      the essential character of the district nor be inconsistent therewith. Save Sunset Beach

      Coalition v. City and County of Honohdu, 102 Haw. 465, 78 P.3d 1 (2003).

5. The Project constitutes a use that would promote the effectiveness and objectives of chapter

      205, HRS, and complies with section 205-6(c), HRS.

6. The Project is consistent with the "overarching purpose" of chapter 205, HRS, which is to

      "protect and conserve natural resources and foster intelligent, effective, and orderly land

      allocation and development." Kaua 'i Springs v. Planning Commission, 130 Haw. 407, 312

      P.3d 283 (2013).

7. The Petition Area is not designated as Important Agricultural Land under Part III of chapter

      205, HRS, and therefore the Project does not conflict with any part of chapter 205, HRS, and

      complies with section 205-6(c), HRS.

8. Article XI, section 1, of the Hawai'i State Constitution requires the State to conserve and

      protect Hawai'i's natural beauty and all natural resources, including land, water, air,

      minerals, and energy sources, and to promote the development and utilization of these

      resources in a manner consistent with their conservation and in furtherance of the self-

      sufficiency of the State.

9. The LUC has considered Article XI, section 1, of the Hawai'i State Constitution and finds

      that the Project is in compliance and non-violative therewith.

10. Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawai'i State Constitution requires the State to conserve and

      protect agricultural lands, promote diversified agriculture, increase agricultural self-

      sufficiency, and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands.




                                                                                               23
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
11. The LUC has considered Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawai'i State Constitution and finds

      that the Project is in compliance and non-violative therewith.

12. A(dcle XII, Section 7, of the Hawai'i State Constitution requires the LUC to protect Native

      Hawaiian traditional and customary rights. The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights,

       customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, cultural, and religious purposes and

      possessed by ahupua'a tenants who are descendants of Native Hawaiians who inhabited the

      Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to the right of the State to regulate such rights.

13. The LUC has considered Article XII, Section 7, of the Hawai'i State Constitution and finds

      that the Project is in compliance and non-violative therewith.

14. The State and its agencies are obligated to protect the reasonable exercise of customarily and

      traditionally exercised Native Hawaiian rights to the extent feasible. Public Access Shoreline

      Hawai'i v. Hawai'i CozmOÿ Planning Commission, 79 Hawai'i 425, 903, P.2d 1246,

      certiorari denied, 517 U.S. 1163, 116 S.Ct. 1559, 134 L.Ed.2d 660 (1996). The LUC has

      considered such responsibilities and obligations and finds the Project to be consistent and

      non-violative therewith.

15. The LUC is empowered to preserve and protect customary and traditional rights of Native

      Hawaiians. Ka Pa'akai 0 Ka'Aina v. Land Use Commission, 94 Hawai'i 31, 7 P.3d 1068

      (2000). The LUC has considered such responsibilities and obligations and finds the Project

      to be consistent and non-violative therewith.

16. Section 205-4.5(a)(21), HRS, permits Solar Energy Facilities ("SEF") on lands with soil

      classified by the LSB's detailed land classification as overall (master) productivity rating B

      or C for which a special permit is granted pursuant to section 205-6, HRS; provided that:




                                                                                                   24
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
       (A) The area occupied by the SEFs is also made available for compatible agricultural
      activities at a lease rate that is at least 50 percent below the fair market rent for comparable
      properties;
      (B) Proof of financial security to decommission the facility is provided to the satisfaction of
      the appropriate county planning commission prior to date of commencement of commercial
      generation; and
      (C) SEFs shall be decommissioned at the owner's expense according to the following
      requirements:
             (i)   Removal        of all   equipment       related     to    the    SEF    within     12
      months of the conclusion of operation or useful life; and
             (ii) Restoration        of    the   disturbed       earth      to     substantially     the
      same physical condition as existed prior to the development of the SEF.

17. The LUC finds the Project has satisfied the requirements of section 205-4.5(a)(21), HRS.




                                      DECISION AND ORDER

        Having duly considered the complete record in this matter and the oral arguments presented

by the Applicant in this proceeding, together with public testimony, and a motion having been duly

made and seconded at a meeting conducted on January 13, 2016, in Lihu'e, Hawai'i, to approve

the recommendation of the Planning Commission, and the motion having received the affirmative

votes required by section 15-15-13, HAR, and there being good cause for the motion, the LUC

hereby APPROVES the recommendation of the Planning Commission approving a State Special

Permit for the Project site within Petition Area with modifications as proposed by OP and the LUC,

and as agreed to by the Applicant, consisting of approximately 50 acres of land in the State Land

Use Agricultural District identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key No. (4) 3-8-002:002 in Kapaia,

Hanamg'ulu, Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, and approximately shown on Exhibit "A" attached hereto

and incorporated by reference herein, subject to the following conditions:

1.    Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall be made available

        for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50 percent below the fair market

        rent for comparable properties, as long as the Project is in operation. Compatible

                                                                                                      25
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
        agricultural operations shall be established by the Applicant and its successors and/or

        assigns within 6 months of the start of commercial power generation. Extensions to this

        deadline may be granted by the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department for

        unforeseen extenuating circumstances. Additional consideration may be given if the

        Applicant is actively seeking to have such operations established.

 ,      If at any time during the term of the Special Permit no compatible agricultural operations

        exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for 6 months, the Applicant shall notify the

        Director of the Kaua'i Planning Department in writing within 30 days of the end of the 6-

        month period. If requested by the Planning Director, the Applicant shall attend a meeting

        of the Planning Commission and submit a report to the Planning Commission detailing the

        Applicant's actual and reasonable efforts to establish compatible agricultural operations on

        the usable lands of the Petition Area. The Plalming Conamission may determine whether

        probable cause exists to re-evaluate the Special Permit and to hold a hearing pursuant to

        the Rules of the Planning Commission. Extensions to the 6-month deadline may be granted

        by the Planning Director for unforeseen extenuating circumstances.

 ,      The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the following from the

        Director of the Kaua'i Planning Department, prior to the issuance of a grading or building

        permit:

        a. Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing and grading activities from June 1 through

            September 15.

        b. A survey map accompanied by a metes and bounds description of the approved Petition

            Area.


        c. A site plan showing the area required under Condition 1, above, relating to the


                                                                                                 26
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
            minimum land area to be made available for compatible agricultural use.

  ,     Prior to the closing of the building permit for the Project, the Applicant shall submit to the

        Kaua'i Planning Department proof of financial security, such as a letter of credit or similar

        assurance, from a creditworthy financial institution satisfactory to Kaua'i Planning

        Department. The security shall remain in place for the duration of the operation of the

        Project, with evidence of same provided to the Director of the Kaua'i Planning Department

        on an annual basis, in an amount approved by the Kaua'i Planning Depalÿment as sufficient

        to decommission the Project and restore the Petition Area to substantially the same physical

        condition as existed prior to the development of the facility.

        The Applicant shall decommission the facility, including the removal of all equipment

        related to the facility, within twelve (12) months following the termination of operations

        of the facility. A change in project ownership or a change in ownership of the land subject

        to the Special Permit, which warrants a new proof of financial security to decommission

        the Project, shall be submitted to the Kaua'i Planning Department for processing through

        the Planning Commission, within three (3) months of the ownership change.

        The Applicant shall incorporate this condition in the license and/or lease agreement with

        the land owner, and said license and!or lease agreement shall be reviewed for approval by

        the Kaua'i Planning Department.

 °      The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:

        a. Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training module, which shall

            include all potential endangered species that may frequent the Petition Area.

        b. All construction workers and solar facility employees shall undergo endangered species

            awareness training prior to starting work.



                                                                                                  27
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
        c. In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed Threatened Species,

            Newell's Shearwater and other seabirds, external lighting shall be only of the following

            types: shielded lights, cut-off luminaries, or indirect lighting. Spotlights aimed upward

            or spotlighting of structures, landscaping or the ocean shall be prohibited.

        d. Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.

        e. Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring at the Project site, and report

            occurrences to the United States Fish & Wildlife Service.

 .      The Applicant shall construct and begin operation of the Project within two (2) years of

        the date of the LUC's Decision and Order approving the Special Permit. Requests for

        extension of this deadline shall be submitted to the Director of the Kaua'i Planning

        Department prior to the expiration of the deadline. The LUC may grant an extension to the

        deadline to establish the Project due to unforeseen circumstances that were beyond the

        control of the Applicant. This Special Permit shall be valid for a period of thirty-five (35)

        years from the date of the LUC's Decision and Order approving the Special Permit, subject

        to further extensions upon a timely request for extension filed with the Planning

        Commission at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the Special Permit's

        expiration. Approval of time extensions shall be required from the LUC.

 ,      On or before December 31 of each year that the Special Permit is in effect, the Applicant

        or its successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, OP, and the Kaua'i Plamling

        Department that demonstrates the Applicant's compliance with conditions of the Special

        Permit.


 .      Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to significant

        increases in the number of PV panels; (2) amendments to the conditions of approval; (3)


                                                                                                  28
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
         significant expansions of the approved area; or (4) change in uses stated herein, shall be

         subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and the LUC. Minor

         modifications including minor additions to accessory uses and structures, and new

         incidental uses and structures in the approved area are subject to review and approval by

         the Director of Kaua'i Planning Department.

  ,      The Applicant and/or landowner shall notify the Director of Kaua'i Planning Department

         of."



         a. Any change or transfer of licensee on the Petition Area.

        b. Any change in uses on the Petition Area.

        c. Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or

        d. Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.

10.     Enforcement of the conditions of the Special Permit shall be pursuant to the Rules of the

        Kaua'i Planning Commission, including the issuance of an order to show cause as to the

        reason the Special Permit should not be revoked if the Kaua'i Planning Commission has

        reason to believe that there has been a failure to perform the conditions herein.

11.     If the PV array or the Project creates a hazardous condition for pilots or motorists, the

        facility operator shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon notification by the Department

        of Transportation, Airports Division, or the Federal Aviation Administration.

12.     In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains, structural remains,

        cultural deposits, artifacts, sand deposits, or sink holes, are identified during demolition

        and/or construction activities, all work shall cease in the immediate vicinity of the find, the

        find shall be protected from additional disturbance, and the State Historic Preservation

        Division ("SHPD") and Kaua'i Island Burial Council, as applicable, shall be contacted



                                                                                                    29
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
         immediately. Without any limitation to any other condition found herein, if any burials or

         archaeological or historic sites are discovered during the course of construction of the

        Project, all construction activity in the vicinity of the discovery shall stop until the issuance

        of an archaeological clearance from the SHPD that mitigation measures have been

        implemented to its satisfaction.

13.     The Applicant shall comply with the requirements of the State Department of Health, the

        County's Fire Depal"tment, Department of Water, and Department of Public Works, as well

        as any other applicable government agencies.

14.     The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices (BMP's) during all

        phases of development in order to minimize erosion, dust, and sedimentation impacts of

        the Project to abutting properties.

15.     The Applicant shall develop and operate the Project, including the implementation of

        measures to mitigate potential impacts of the Project, in substantial compliance with the

        representations made to the Planning Commission and the LUC as reflected in this

        Decision and Order. Such mitigation measures include, but are not limited to, the use of

        temporary and permanent BMPs to ensure that the development and operation of the

        Project do not result in an increase in stormwater runoff that adversely impacts downstream

        properties. Failure to so develop the Project may result in revocation of the Special Permit.

16.     To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and applicable

        prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the Applicant shall seek to hire Kaua'i

        contractors, and shall seek to employ residents of Kaua'i in temporary construction and

        permanent jobs. It is recognized that the Applicant may have to employ non-Kaua'i

        residents for particular skilled jobs where no qualified Kaua'i resident possesses such



                                                                                                     3O
SP15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
         skills. For the purpose of this condition, the Planning Commission shall relieve the

         competitive restraints on trade or other monopolistic practice.

 17.     The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building techniques and

         operational methods for the Project, such as Leadership in Energy and Enviromnental

         Design (LEED) standards or another comparable state-approved, nationally-recognized,

         and consensus-based guideline, standard, or system, and strategies, wlfich may include but

         are not limited to recycling, natural lighting, extensive landscaping, solar panels, low-

         energy fixtures, low energy lighting and other similar methods and techniques. All such

         proposals shall be reflected on the plans submitted for building permit review.

18.      The Planning Commission reserves the right to revise, add, or delete conditions of approval

         in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts the Project may create, or to revoke the

        permits through the proper procedures should conditions of approval not be complied with

         or be violated.

19.      The Applicant is advised that additional government agency conditions may be imposed.

        It shall be the Applicant's responsibility to resolve those conditions with the respective

        agencies.




                                                                                                 31
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
                                     ADOPTION OF ORDER

                 This ORDER shall take effect upon the date this ORDER is celÿified by this

Commission.


                 Done at Honolulu, Hawai'i, this         29 th., day of January, 2016, per motion

on January 13, 2015 in Lihue, Kauai.

                                            LAND USE COMMISSION

                                            STATE OF HAWAI'I

 APPROVED AS TO FORM


 Deputy Attorney General



                                            Byÿÿ                       ÿ!ÿ
                                            EDMUND ACZOÿ -
                                            Chairperson and Commissioner




 Filed and effective on:




  1/29/16




 DANIEL E. ORODENKER
 Executive Officer




                                                                                              32
SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
                              BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                  OF THE STATE OF HAWAI'I

In the Matter of the Application of           )     Docket No. SP 15-407
                                              )
SOLARCITY CORPORATION                         )     F1NDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS
                                              )     OF LAW, AND DECISION AND
For a Special Use Permit to Establish         )     ORDER APPROVING THE
a Solar Energy Facility on                    )     RECOMMENDATION OF THE COUNTY
approximately 50 acres of Land                )     OF ICAUA'I PLANNING COMMISSION
within the State Land Use Agricultural        )     TO APPROVE THE STATE SPECIAL
District at Kapaia, Hanamfi'ulu, Lÿhu'e,      )     USE PERMIT APPLICATION WITH
KAUA'I, Hawai'i, Tax Map Key                  )     MODIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATE
(4) 3-8-002:002.                              )     OF SERVICE
                                              )
                                  CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        I hereby certify that a copy of the foregoing document was duly served upon the following

by depositing the same in the AS INDICATED BELOW on January 27, 2016:

        LEO R. ASUNCION, JR., AICP, Acting Director        (HAND DELIVERY)
        Office of Planning, State of Hawai'i
        235 South Beretania Street
        6th Floor, Leiopapa A Kamehameha Bldg.
        Honolulu, Hawai'i 96813

        BRYAN C. YEE, ESQ.                                 (HAND DELIVERY)
        Deputy Attorney General
        Department of the Attorney General
        425 Queen Street
        Honolulu, Hawai'i 96813
        Attorney for the Office of Planning

        MICHAEL DAHILIG, Director                          (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
        Planning Department, County of Kaua'i               RECEIPT REQUESTED)
        4444 Rice Street
        Lghu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i 96766

        ICAUA'I COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
        c/o Planning Department, County of Kaua'i           RECEIPT REQUESTED)
        4444 Rice Street
        Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i 96766




SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
         JODI HIGUCHI, ESQ.                               (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
         Office of the County Attorney                     RECEIPT REQUESTED)
         4444 Rice Street, Suite 220
         Lÿhu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i 96766
         Attorney for Kaua'i County Planning Department

         BENJAMIN M. MATSUBARA, ESQ.                      (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
         CURTIS T. TABATA, ESQ.                           RECEIPT REQUESTED
         888 Mililani Street, Eighth Floor
         Honolulu, Hawai'i 96813




                         DATED: Honolulu, Hawai'i    1/29/16




                                           DANIEL E. ORODENKER
                                           Executive Officer




SP 15-407 SolarCity Corporation
Decision And Order
