                                                                                                                DAVID Y. IGE
             OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                                                    GOVERNOR

                                                                                                     LEO R. ASUNClON
             STATE OF HAWAII                                                                                        DIRECTOR
                                                                                                      OFFICE OF PLANNING

             235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813         Telephone:              (808) 587-2846
             Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                      Fax:               (808) 587-2824
                                                                                        Web:    http:llplanning.hawaiLgovl


Ref. No. P- 14992

                                                   January5,2016


MEMORANDUM
                                                                                                         i: >
                                                                                                    ( rl ÿ="
To:              Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer
                 Land Use Commission
                                                                                            !
                                                                                                     " ÿl C)
From:            Leo R. Asuncion, Directÿÿ"ÿ"ÿ
                                                        \ k...J

Subject:         Special Permit Application No. SP 15-407                                            ix, C€?

                 SolarCity Corporation
                 TMK: (4) 3-8-002:002 Por.
                 Kapaia, Hanamalu, Lihue, Kauai

        The Office of Planning (OP) recommends approval of the Special Permit Application,
SP 15-407, SolarCity Corporation, with additional and/or amended conditions consistent with the
Land Use Commission's ("LUC") decision in SP 15-406, Kawailoa Solar, LLC.

        A.    Relevant Statutory Provisions

        The use of good agricultural lands for solar energy facilities presents a difficult question
on how to balance conflicting goals. Solar generation facilities provide an important source of
renewable clean energy. There is a strong demand for the agricultural lands by solar companies
because they are relatively cheap, generally located away from most residential centers, and are
often on relatively flat terrain. Furthermore, the process for approval of a special permit is
significantly shorter, easier, and less rigorous than the process for approval of a district boundary
amendment petition. The availability of agricultural land for solar energy generation, however,
also has the effect of making good agricultural land more expensive and less available for
farming.

        The conflicting goals of renewable energy and agriculture are balanced in the provisions
of sections 205-2(d)(6), and 205-4.5(a)(20) and (21), HRS. Solar facilities are generally
prohibited on A-rated lands, with a small exception under very rigorous conditions. HRS § 205-
4.5(a)(20). Solar facilities on D or E rated lands are generally allowed. HRS § 205-2(d)(6).
Solar facilities on B or C rated lands are allowed if they do not occupy more than 10% of the
parcel and are less than twenty (20) acres in size, or with a special permit. HRS § 205-2(d)(6)
and 4.5(a)(21). A special permit on B or C rated lands is only given subject to certain
restrictions. HRS § 205-4.5(a)(21).
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 2



       HRS § 205-4.5(a)(21) allows solar energy facilities on lands with B or C rated soils
pursuant to a special permit, provided that (1) the area occupied by the solar energy facility is
also made available for compatible agricultm'al activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty per
cent below the fair market rent for comparable properties; (2) proof of financial security to
decommission the facility is provided to the satisfaction of the appropriate county planning
department prior to commencement of commercial power generation; and (3) the solar energy
facility is decommissioned at the owner's expense within twelve months of the conclusion of
operations or the facility's useful life and the area is restored to its pre-development condition.

         B.   Factual and Procedural Background

        On December 7, 2015, the Kauai Planning Commission sent a letter to the Land Use
Commission ("LUC") recotmnending approval with conditions. The application proposes to
construct a 17 megawatt solar generation facility on approximately 50 acres with a 13-megawatt
battery storage system and related ancillary facilities. See page 1 of the Planning Director's
Report. The entire area is composed of B-rated soils. See page lofthe Department of
Agriculture Letter attached hereto as Exhibit 1.

         The Kauai Planning Department ("PD") concluded that "[t]he useable portions of the site
will be leased for pasture purposes at a rate or rates that are fifty percent (50%) below the fair
market rental value." See page 4 of the Planning Director's Report. The Kauai PD also
concluded that "[f]ollowing the anticipated twenty-five (25) to thirty (30) year life and operation
of the solar facility, all equipment will either be retrofitted with new equipment or will be
removed from the site, and the site will be restored to its preconstruction condition."

         C.   Issues of Concern


                1.     Flora and Fauna

        The applicant submitted a flora and fauna smwey dated October 2015. During the survey,
the consultant observed the endangered Nene and the Pacific Golden Plover on site. The study
also noted that the endangered Hawaiian Petrel, and threatened endemic Newell's Shearwater
has been recorded flying over the project area. The study recommended cexÿain mitigation
measures. The County, however, only listed the mitigation measm-e relating to lighting among
its conditions. OP recommends that all mitigation measures recommended by the applicant's
consultant be required as a condition.

         While the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) was only recently contacted on
December 30, 2015 to review this application, we note that USFWS has commented in other
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 3



State Special Permit applications for solar farms, e.g., SP15-406 Kawailoa Solar, LLC. In that
case, the USFWS commented as follows:

                 Birds have been inadvertently attracted to these sites due to solar panels'
                 resemblance to water ... Once attracted, collisions with the solar arrays
                 have resulted in injuries and mortalities; once grounded birds are also
                 subject to predation (Kagan et.al. 2014). While attraction to solar an'ays
                 has not yet been documented in Hawaii, the State harbors a significant
                 diversity of waterbird and shorebird species. We recommend that
                 personnel at the solar site be educated about the potential for birds to be
                 attracted and inadvertently harmed. If monitoring indicates that species
                 are occurring at the photovoltaic system, or additional information about
                 the facility's impacts to native Hawaiian species becomes available, please
                 contact us so we may assist you in avoiding and minimizing impacts.

See Exhibit 2.

         The flora and fauna study indicates that the Hawaiian hoary bat likely overflies the
project area. Adverse impacts to roosting bats during the roosting and pupping season, between
June 1 and September 15, can be avoided or minimized by not clearing and grubbing vegetation
that are suitable for roosting bats. The study indicates that there are no suitable roosting trees
within the proposed project site; however, since the entire project is within a large vegetated
area, OP would still recommend that clearing and grubbing be avoided and/or minimized during
the Hawaiian hoary bat's roosting and pupping season. Both the USFWS and the applicant's
consultants have recommended that barbed wire not be used to protect the Hawaiian hoary bat.
OP's recommendations on conditions relating to flora and fauna (including the County's existing
condition) are set forth in the OP's proposed Conditions 3(a) and 5.

                 2.    Agriculture

        On December 17, 2015, the Department of Agriculture (DOA) submitted a memorandum
to OP which expressed concern regarding the sufficiency of information relating to the feasibility
and likelihood of compatible agricultural activities on site for local food production.

        The DOA also noted that, "°B' rated agricultural lands are a scarce and valuable resource
with good capacity to contribute substantially to food self-sufficiency. The 100-year history of
agricultural activities on the project site and adjacent area is evidence of the productive capacity
of the project area. (Application, page 15) The project site also possesses some of the
characteristics that may qualify it as potential Important Agricultural Lands, pursuant to Pm-t III
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 4



of Chapter 205, HRS." In fact the remainder of this Tax Map Key parcel was granted IAL
approval under DR12-48 Grove Farm Company Incorporated.

        Based upon these concerns and the value of the site for agricultural production, the DOA
recommended that the LUC specifically require the applicant and its successors and/or assigns to
establish a goat and/or sheep pasture operation or other agricultural enterprise on the property for
the duration of the operation of the solar energy generation facility. See Exhibit 2.

         The condition relating to the establishment and maintenance of compatible agricultural
activities within six months after operation is set forth in OP Conditions 1 and 2. The condition
relating to proof of financial security is set forth in OP Condition 4 which also incorporates
Kauai County's proposed condition 3.

         D.   Recommendation


         OP recommends approval of this Special Permit, subject to a set of conditions which are
consistent with the Kawailoa Solar SUP (Docket No. SP15-406, June 29, 2015) and which
incorporate the conditions recommended by the Kauai Planning Commission, and the comments
and recommendations from the DOA and the USFWS.

        Accordingly, OP recommends approval of the Special Permit subject to the following
conditions (Kauai Planning Commission conditions are noted in italics):

                   .   Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall
                       be made available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at
                       least 50 percent below the fair market rent for comparable properties, as
                       long as the Project is in operation. Compatible agricultural operations
                       shall be established by the Applicant and its successors and/or assigns
                       within 6 months of the start of commercial power generation. Extensions
                       to this deadline may be granted by the Director of the County of Kauai
                       Planning Department (PD) for unforeseen extenuating circumstances.
                       Additional consideration may be given if the Applicant is actively seeldng
                       to have such operations established.

                   .   If at any time during the term of the Special Permit (SP) no compatible
                        agricultural operations exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for 6
                       months, the Applicant shall notify the Director of the Kauai PD in writing
                       within 30 days of the end of the 6-month period. If requested by the
                        Planning Director, the Applicant shall attend a meeting of the Planning
                        Commission and submit a report to the Plamÿing Commission detailing the
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
Jannary 5, 2016
Page 5



                       Applicant's actual and reasonable efforts to establish compatible
                       agricultural operations on the usable lands of the Petition Area. The
                       Planning Commission may determine whether probable cause exists to re-
                       evaluate the SP and to hold a hearing pursuant to the Rules of the Planning
                       Commission. Extensions to the 6-month deadline may be granted by the
                       Planning Director for unforeseen extenuating circumstances.

                ,      The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the
                       following from the Director of the Kauai PD, prior to the issuance of a
                       grading or building permit:

                       a.   Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing and grading activities
                            from June 1 through September 15.

                       b.   A survey map accompanied by a metes and bounds description of the
                            approved Petition Area.

                       c.   A site plan showing the area required under Condition 1, above,
                            relating to the minimum land area to be made available for
                            compatible agricultural use.

                .      Prior to the closing of the building permit for the facility, the Applicant
                       shall submit to the Kauai PD proof of financial security, such as a letter of
                       credit or similar assurance, from a creditworthy financial institution
                       satisfactory to Kauai PD. The security shall remain in place for the
                       duration of the operation of the Project, with evidence of same provided to
                       the Director of the Kauai PD on an annual basis, in an amount approved
                       by the Kauai PD as sufficient to decommission the Project and restore the
                       Petition Area to substantially the same physical condition as existed prior
                       to the development of the facility.

                       The applicant shall decommission the facility, including the removal of all
                       equipment related to the facility, within twelve (12) months following the
                       termination of operations of the facility. A change in proj ect ownership or
                       a change in ownership of the land subject to the SP, which warrants a new
                       proof of financial security to decommission the proj ect, shall be submitted
                       to the Kauai DP, within three (3) months of the ownership change.

                       The Applicant shall incorporate this condition in the license and/or lease
                       agreement with the land owner, and said license and/or lease agreement
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 6



                          shall be reviewed for approval by the Kauai PD. (Portion of condition 3 of
                          the Kauai Planning Commission Approval letter dated, November 6, 2015,
                          to the Land Use Commission.)

                  ,       The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:

                          a,    Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training
                                module, which shall include all potential endangered species that
                                may frequent the Petition area.

                          b.    All construction workers and solar facility employees shall undergo
                                endangered species awareness training prior to starting work.

                          C.   In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed
                               Threatened Species, Newell's Shearwater and other seabirds, external
                               lighting shall be only of the following types: shielded lights, cut-off
                               luminaries, or indirect lighting. Spotlights aimed upward or
                               spotlighting of structures, landscaping or the ocean shall be prohibited.
                               (Condition 7 of the Kauai Planning Commission Approval letter dated,
                               November 6, 2015, to the Land Use Commission.)

                          d. Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.

                          e. Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring at the photovoltaic
                               system, and report occun'ences to the USFWS.


                  .       The Applicant shall establish the Project within two (2) years of the date
                          of the LUC's Decision and Order approving the SP. Requests for
                          extension of this deadline shall be submitted to the Director of the Kauai
                          PD prior to the expiration of the deadline. The LUC may grant an
                          extension to the deadline to establish the Project due to unforeseen
                          circumstances that were beyond the control of the Applicant. This SP
                          shall be valid for a period of thirty-five (35) years from the date of the
                          LUC's Decision and Order approving the SP, subject to further extensions
                          upon a timely request for extension filed with the Planning Commission at
                          least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the SP's expiration.
                          Approval of time extensions shall not be required from the LUC.

                      .   On or before December 31 of each year that the SP is in effect, the
                          Applicant or its successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, OP, and
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 7



                       the Kauai PD that demonstrates the Applicant's compliance with
                       conditions of the SP.

                °      Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to
                       significant increases in the number of PV panels; (2) amendments to the
                       conditions of approval; (3) significant expansions of the approved area; or
                       (4) change in uses stated herein, shall be subject to the review and
                       approval of the Planning Commission and the LUC. Minor modifications
                       including minor additions to accessory uses and structures, and new
                       incidental uses and structures in the approved area are subject to review
                       and approval by the Director of Kauai PD.

                .      The Applicant and/or landowner shall notify the Director of Kauai PD of:

                       a. Any change or transfer of licensee on the Petition Area.

                       b. Any change in uses on the Petition Area.

                       c. Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or

                       d. Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.

               10.     Enforcement of the conditions of the SP shall be pursuant to the Rules of
                       the Planning Commission, including the issuance of an order to show
                       cause as to the reason the SP should not be revoked if the Planning
                       Commission has reason to believe that there has been a failure to perform
                       the conditions herein.

               11.     If the PV array creates a hazardous condition for pilots or motorists, the
                       facility operator shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon notification
                       by the DOT, Airports Division, or the FAA.

               12.     In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains,
                       structural remains, cultural deposits, artifacts, sand deposits, or sink holes,
                       are identified during demolition and/or construction activities, all work
                       shall cease in the immediate vicinity of the find, the find shall be protected
                       from additional disturbance, and the SHPD and Kauai Island Burial
                       Council, as applicable, shall be contacted immediately. Without any
                       limitation to any other condition found herein, if any burials or
                       archaeological or historic sites are discovered during the course of
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 8



                        construction of the facility, all construction activity in the vicinity of the
                        discovery shall stop until the issuance of an archaeological clearance from
                        the SHPD that mitigation measures have been implemented to its
                        satisfaction.

                  13.   The Applicant shall comply with the requirements of the State Department
                        of Health, the County's Fire Department, the Department of Water, and
                        the Department of Public Works, as well as any other applicable
                        government agencies. (Condition 4 of the Kauai Planning Commission
                        Approval letter dated', November 6, 2015, to the Land Use Commission.)

                  14.   The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices
                        (BMP's) during all phases of development in order to minimize erosion,
                        dust, and sedimentation impacts of the project to abutting propelÿies.
                        (Condition 5 of the Kauai Planning Commission Approval letter dated',
                        November 6, 2015, to the Land Use Commission.)

                  15.   The Applicant shall develop and operate the facility, including the
                        implementation of measures to mitigate potential impacts of the Project, in
                        substantial compliance with the representations made to the Planning
                        Commission and the LUC as reflected in this Decision and Order. Such
                        mitigation measures include, but are not limited to, the use of temporary
                        and permanent BMPs to ensure that the development and operation of the
                        facility do not result in an increase in stormwater runoff that adversely
                        impacts downstream propelÿies. Failure to so develop the Petition Area
                        may result in revocation of the SP. (Condition 1 of the Kauai Planning
                        Commission Approval letter dated, November 6, 2015, to the Land Use
                        Commission.)

                  16.   To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and
                        applicable prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the
                        Applicant shall seek to hire Kauai contractors, and shall seek to employ
                        residents of Kauai in temporary construction and permanent jobs. It is
                        recognized that the applicant may have to employ non-Kauai residents for
                        particular skilled jobs where no qualified Kauai resident possesses such
                        skills. For the purpose of this condition, the Commission shall relieve the
                        applicant of this requirement if the applicant is subjected to anti-
                        competitive restraints on trade or other monopolistic practice. (Condition 8
                        of the Kauai Planning Commission Approval letter dated, November 6,
                        2015, to the Land Use Commission.)
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
January 5, 2016
Page 9




                17.    The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building
                      techniques and operational methods for the project, such as Leadership in
                      Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards or another
                      comparable state approved, nationally recognized, and consensus-based
                      guideline, standard, or system, and strategies, which may include but is
                      not limited to recycling, natural lighting, extensive landscaping, solar
                      panels, low-energy fixtures, low energy lighting and other similar methods
                      and techniques. All such proposals shall be reflected on the plans
                       submitted for building permit review. (Condition 9 of the Kauai Planning
                       Commission Approval letter dated, November 6, 2015, to the Land Use
                       Commission.)

                18.    The Planning Cotmnission reserves the right to revise, add, or delete
                       conditions of approval in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts
                       the project may create, or to revoke the permits through the proper
                       procedures should conditions of approval not be complied with or be
                       violated. (Condition 10 of the Kauai Planning Commission Approval letter
                       dated, November 6, 2015, to the Land Use Commission.)

                19.    The Applicant is advised that additional government agency conditions
                       may be imposed. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to resolve those
                       conditions with the respective agencies. (Condition 11 of the Kauai
                       Planning Commission Approval letter dated, November 6, 2015, to the
                       Land Use Commission.)

       If you should have any questions, please contact Rodney Funakoshi or Lorene Maki of
our Land Use Division at 587-2888.

c: Kauai Planning Department
    Department of Agriculture
   Curtis Tabata
  DAVID Y. IGE                                                                              SCO'FI" E. ENRIGHT
    Governor                                                                          Chairperson, Board of Agriculture
SHAN S. TSUTSUI                                                                     PHYLLIS SHIMABUKURO-GEISER
  Lt. Governor                                                                           Deputy to the Chairperson

                                                 State of Hawaii
                                       DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                              1428 South King Street
                                          Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512
                                    Phone: (808) 973-9600 FAX: (808) 973-9613



                                          , December 17, 2015




  Mr. Leo R. Asuncion, Jr.
  Acting Director
  Office of Planning
  State of Hawaii
  P. O. Box 2359
  Honolulu, Hawaii 96804-2359

  Dear Mr. Asuncion:

  Subject:        Application for Special Use Permit
                  Kapaia Solar Project
                  SolarCity Corporation
                  TMK: 3-8-02: portion 2 (Waipio, Oahu)
                  Area: 46.5 of 5,341 total acres


  The Department of Agriculture has reviewed the subject application and other documentation
  sent to us by your staff and offers the following comments and recommendations.

  Background
  The 46.5-acre project site is owned by Grove Farm Company and is within the State Agricultural
  District, is designated as Agriculture in the Kauai General Plan, is within an area meant for
  agricultural activities and open space preservation according to the Lihue Development Plan,
  and is within Kauai County's Agriculture District zone. The solar energy facility consists of
  54,265 photovoltaic panels and a battery energy storage system. The total ground area to be
  disturbed is less than 2 acres. (Application, page 8) The panels Will be about 6.5 feet in height
  at its highest point. (Application, page 9) No information is provided on the height of the panels
  at their lowest point.

  The project site appears to be entirely comprised of "B" rated soils according to the "Detailed
  Land Classification - Island of Kauai" (Land Study Bureau, December 1967, map 92). As such,
  solar energy facilities with a compatible agricultural activity may be permitted by special permit,
  pursuant to Section 205-4.5(a)(21), Hawaii Revised Statutes. The applicant "...will lease the
  usable portions of the Subject Property for the pasturing of sheep and/or goats at rates which
  are at least 50% below the fair market value. (Application, page 23)




                                                                                   OP EXHIBIT 1
Mr. Leo Asuncion
December 17, 2015
Page 2


At the end of the solar energy facility's operational life, the facility may be retrofitted with new
equipment, or removed and the land area returned to its pre-construction condition. (Application,
page ! 1)

The property appears to be currently unused. (Application, page 14) Earlier uses include seed
corn, livestock pasture, and sugarcane. (Application, page 15). Existing and former uses of the
surrounding lands include agricultural uses and a skeet shooting facility. (Application, page 15)
The Kauai Island Utility Cooperative (KIUC) operates the Kapaia powerplant to the east of the
project site. (Application, page 8)

Irrigation water is available from Grove Farm Company's irrigation system on and adjacent to
the property. It is stated that potable water is not needed for the project. (Application, page 18)
No well facilities will be developed and no water will be withdrawn from any streams.
(Application, page 15) A perimeter fence will be built. (Flora and Fauna Surveys Conducted for
the Kapaia Solar Photovoltaic and BatteryEnergy Storage Project; Reginald E. David and Maya
LeGrande; October 15, 2015, page 17)

Description of the proposed compatible agricultural use on the subject property
The applicant "...will lease the usable portions of the Subject Property for the pasturing of sheep
and/or goats at rates which are at least 50% below the fair market value." (Application, page 23)
There is no information on how many acres of the project site is c6nsidered "usable portions",
whether these portions are contiguous or fragmented, what is the animal carrying capacity of
the "usable portions", what the land rental rate would be, and how long will the lease term be.

Further, the Department of Agriculture questions whether the act of pasturing sheep and/or
goats meets the purpose and intent of Section 205-4.5(a)(21), HRS as expressed in Section 1
of Act 55, Session Laws of Hawaii 2014, which is to "...enable the complementai'y uses of utility
scale solar energy generation and local food production..." on "B" and "C" rated agricultural
land. (emphasis added). The Department scrutinized all the documentation sent to us by the
Office of Planning and found no information indicating that the sheep and/or goats were for local
food production.

The application contains no information on the market demand for sheep and goats on Kauai.
Statistics on goats and sheep populations, number of farms, on-island sales versus statewide,
and so forth are found in the Census of Agriculture (National Agricultural Statistics Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture) See http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/index.php

The application provides no information on what other infrastructure will be required to operate
an animal grazing facility, how the animals will be provided drinking water, or alternative
compatible agricultural uses should goats and/or sheep not be successful.
Mr. Leo Asuncion
December 17, 2015
Page 3


Recommendation
The Department of Agriculture strongly supports existing farming operations and those seeking
to start new farming enterprises. The Department also supports solar energy operations in
combination with compatible local food production on "B" and "C" rated agricultural land as
provided for in Chapter 205, HRS. "B" rated agricultural lands are a scarce and valuable
resource with good capacity to contribute substantially to food self-sufficiency. The 100-year
history of agricultural activities on the project site and adjacent area is evidence of the
productive capacity of the project area. (Application, page 15) The project site also possesses
some of the characteristics that may qualify it as potential Important Agricultural Lands,
pursuant to Part III of Chapter 205, HRS.

We believe this large-scale project should comply fully with the purpose and intent of Section
205-4.5(a)(21) as stated in Section 1 of Act 55, Session Laws of Hawaii 2014 which is to
"...enable the complementary uses of utility scale solar energy generation and local food
production..." on "B" and "C" rated agricultural land (emphasis added).


Based on the absence of information on the compatible a.qricultural use proposed for the project
site, we recommend the Land Use Commission impose a condition that the applicant and its
successors and/or assigns shall have established a goat and/or sheep pasture operation or
other agricultural enterprise on the property in compliance with Act 55, 2014 Session Laws of
Hawaii for the duration of the operation of the solar energy generation facility.

Thank you for the opportunity to provide our input. Should you have any questions, please
contact Earl Yamamoto at 973-9466 or email at earl.j.yamamoto @ hawaii.gov.




                                             Chairperson, Board of Agriculture


c: Michael A. Dahilig, Director
   Planning Department, County of Kauai
               i"
.i
-t
(!
.!


                                           ffnitcd States Depa m nt of the, lat or
     .I
     !
     !1                                               Paÿ. ÿ Fÿ ÿa. ÿmmÿ oÿeÿÿ
                                                      300. AIaM0hnalÿfileyaÿd, ÿQom ÿ-!22
                                                            Honolulu, Iÿ awÿ:i ÿM0


                      2O15-TA-0ÿ54

                         , ÿ. oÿ.._lÿAtÿ




                      City and CountyOfHawai'i

                      H,ono!ulo, t!awÿi'i 96813.


                                                     4

                      Iÿeaÿ lye.. Attaÿ



                      comments oÿ tÿ Aÿpiieation foÿ a ssÿiÿ. ÿse eÿ :nÿt foÿFiÿt Wtua'h (dÿ.h.X.awÿoa solÿ-ÿ.
                       LGI p.mÿe,d deÿelo-ÿ.m,ÿn.t of ÿ Kawatlo_a 8olaÿ F0_m! Froÿech ÿ 5ÿ megawatt (MW)xo.Iÿ-
                      energy fhci!i'ty on apiÿroMmateiy:3g4.1 atÿ¢.sÿ ÿ ffÿo.noitk, s.hÿmÿof O*ÿO [TMÿ 0) 6::-.Lÿ
                       0.0,5:001 ÿ0ÿ.)ÿ&G1-006:00I ÿor:ÿJ. T.ÿi, proÿosed solarfarmwould be co-10caÿexl wittt thÿ
                       existing Kawailoa ÿd fan:n; By ÿtorÿ0"nneÿthÿg tO. "t}ic san0 e{ectri_eal awitcl{yÿ and
                      'transmissiorr ]ÿaes.as thÿ cxis'ting wmdfamt, tttÿ£ÿ.i)0sÿfi, s oIÿ pÿ.oject buÿ.dÿ on. WOrÿtM[ Wÿ
                       dOge'ÿ, s.tlÿoÿin- d farm. gild ena.bies eoimecti6ÿl ÿo I-IawaÿiiaÿEleÿtriÿ Comply. ÿ :s.
                       elecÿr2caÿ grf&wfthOut thtÿ neM,f6r nÿV4 ÿtergonnecffOil ilffraÿtnlÿo.                   - : ....

                      Thg:solÿ ,arm.w ou.!dlÿo comprised era he. .nÿ.. ntÿ.angl.ÿ-axt .s tmckingÿ glomld.-mounteR
                      photovolt0i.'o sys tÿm, des [.gBe4 k!, maxlmÿo {hÿ. u s.ÿ: 0f'tli.ÿ tgÿakÿ, Wf.th'tko. pmle-Iÿ: faeÿg
                      ap!ÿtoÿinatelydnÿ ÿ.0uÿ, ÿ-ae!i.ÿfincl woÿ& gÿneÿafÿ Eÿweÿ ÿ: 1,00O volts au4 00- aÿ'rag%.ÿ
                      exÿe¢ÿccl ÿo 6xtend ,,ÿ.:oÿly 4 fÿ.ÿ 6 hie-h.esT"m 9 feet 6 ih.c!ÿ.off the ÿound. EEcifiÿaL.
                      eÿlfflÿmeÿc{uKing c0m-bÿke.rbo.ÿ, CoRec[oÿ lines, ikveÿer% WeatIlor'ÿoÿtoÿug;stations; ring
          J           switch geÿ vZould Be itÿtal{&I ÿ ÿ ÿ.ÿciÿp of ÿe pmÿ¢lÿ ÿ. Iÿ*ede4.to..iÿlÿrcasÿthdÿ.Ie.cfdcal
                      vo!fagÿmld agÿegÿate ÿ gÿnÿraÿd e.leÿcity -for tralmlnittaI vie ÿ5e cOIlÿ.ctor sy,tem. The
                      gÿ.OpOÿe., .Kawailqa Sol ar'Fatm wouldprOdilCe elÿ IOW,ÿOsÿ :enewablÿ eaÿrg:t, for the i slÿfig .6£"
                       O.ÿ                                                    ..                         -      ....



                       Ttÿ area Wÿ. M.'st0n.c .ÿ.y ÿaÿt 0fa !aÿg¢ sngarÿ?lanMtmn, ÿ:ÿ gompnsed of agneuIÿuÿal-flc.ldÿ
                       Iocÿ¢d.atoÿ a s.ette.s of .td0felands ÿntersÿrÿ.ÿiÿ guÿclaeÿ formÿa tiy: intÿmiiÿtent didinagÿ,
                       First Wiucl ihtends ÿo lease thapÿoposed sifÿ for sheep xancklog. EkeAiÿt foÿ thÿ tradsformers,



                                                €




              - ÿ.'                                                                                      OP EXHIBIT 2
)



              :d,x.tacompfledby,
                :..
                                  thoHawÿ'iBiod[veÿgty.an6Mÿ ÿ N'o"gram aÿ it ' eÿh,ÿ
                      .... ,- ;... ,=. .ÿ .... ... ..... :, .Pÿ ........... ÿ
                                                                                    to ÿÿ rlÿ 'ÿ ÿ °
                                                                                            P..ÿ


             ' 1973. sA)' as " (iaU.g,.C. 153! (,q..), .O taa.t(k "m. iv .' dang M




                .+.+.+..1+:' , ,+      ".'   :.,.   . ... + , . + ..ÿ:   .l   ÿ   ...+   ÿ.       ÿ..   --+:   .I • ......
               • +t(.ÿ)maYf6ragÿ. andmostjrÿ tho_ÿ.mje.ctateÿ" .Th+£++s-nO pm+ÿosed, obdesignateAcriffe a! -
               habit@jbeatg) ÿ fliÿ vid_tfiÿ Cgi!t+ prop9 s..ÿ. iÿrofedt+ÿem. ÿ;*e'oVer ÿlÿoiiowiiÿ ÿo.ÿmm.enÿ to

i
1              WiJÿleg.Vo:yofing miatt. .en'de.'diiX "ÿttrSÿy - ttÿ,tÿ+ÿd s)Imlbs,wh6rÿ:ihÿy- forage.. ÿ".ÿees 0tsÿbs
               sÿh61 .e'fot-bat:.mOSfiiÿg .areMeatÿff dttrÿg+thÿ.bre:eÿ, g seasoa, .theÿgig a.:ÿsk- ÿat yo.ungb.at.s
                oÿl&imidv¢rtent!ÿ: bÿ ,tiarmÿa br killed, ÿTo ÿg;ffnpaeÿ}0. the. ÿM-ÿgerecl+lTawaiiafl"
               .hom:g. b_' a.t++w90 .dX+p .lguis ÿea!ÿ thap 15-reeF(4, .6".mef+'ÿ)-tÿ stioulit not be ÿ+mifb;'ÿ,)tgm0ved,


               .ÿidÿfionÿy,. [ÿwÿim h6ÿ Batÿ it avel!iÿea snagÿdoa lÿm:Iÿ-eÿ wh'$t'enciri' :vi"" ;': +'+ +'' + ' '
               rÿ;oÿettd [hat+il!+ soNt.faeili+ lent+ desigab+ÿ desjgnÿ to.: aqoÿit ill+ llse o+ batbed'Nk+..

              "iÿ'aeii4-ÿ mÿato:ty :?+ateffo WA agd sh0mi3irdS:, This s0urcÿ' 0fmoda!i'ty, Jaas Fÿn: deÿeÿibei _



               :fiavÿ T6Sat ÿ.,adirÿ,ff&tIy attracted to3ti;so sitÿs duÿ to, sblarÿanÿ'Isÿ tÿsemblaiic£ tO ;ÿ,a,,,ÿ?'-.



               y..pt been dqcdÿentÿ. ÿ ÿ!2Lit.W.a'ii:O :o+Staÿbiÿ a s!hnÿ, Cang:ÿverslty of:wÿieÿd"ÿnÿI .... '
               s]torÿbÿ[sÿeÿ. ÿrÿc6mmendthaÿpersonnÿiaÿ[hÿs61aÿ si[6-bo Fÿiÿca/edab0fiÿtRo ote ntial
               fib +" +.. !`.'
                  xbÿda.to+.be+aftÿaet.,ed,
                               +" + " " ''+ andma  gvÿ_R+ÿ.yha2rme4.
                                                -, . .,.-._ :+',     Ifmoÿ_ttonnaiÿdic.ate-sthatsp.e.eiÿa:Laÿ.'
                                                                 .' .,u,.-?.:; .:+"+ T".  " +. " .      ÿ"ÿ: +.,- '
                ...ceuÿ. ng at .ÿ lÿh_"otqvo!.ÿc, syste_m,, or, addittona[, informatm'nab6ut;tke fg.'.cilffy'g, iniÿ.ÿts to. +




         +
               Weitope ÿ, inÿorÿ., lion .ÿsiÿts, thp PIÿng Co,-ÿssÿda' withz,ÿeir appmvÿ procÿs,Wÿ
     z       .+ apl?reciate YOUÿ dffo.ÿ: t,.o. Conserve h'.s.ÿd speÿcies."+ If you tiave qu.est1ons abo.gt.+out.co.mmentsÿ




    _+
                                                                                              r
     pÿsÿ ÿ.Oatÿeÿ ÿinS, ÿ, rs!and,Team Bio!ogiÿf; ÿahtÿ lÿauÿtq, NOith Western Hÿtwatiÿtt



.L
