                                 LAND USE COMMISSION
                                   MEETING MINUTES
                                  November 8, 2017
                                       9:30 a.m.
              County of Kaua`i Moikeha Building Conference Room 2A/2B
                       4444 Rice Street, Līhu`e, Kaua`i, Hawai`i, 96766



COMMISSIONERS PRESENT:              Jonathan Scheuer
                                    Linda Estes
                                    Nancy Cabral
                                    Dawn Chang
                                    Lee Ohigashi
                                    Aaron Mahi
                                    Arnold Wong

COMMISSIONERS EXCUSED:              Edmund Aczon
                                    Gary Okuda

LUC STAFF     PRESENT:              Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer
                                    Diane Erickson, Deputy Attorney General
                                    Bert Saruwatari, Staff Planner
                                    Scott Derrickosn, Staff Planner
                                    Riley Hakoda, Staff Planner/Chief Clerk

COURT REPORTER:                     Jean McManus

CALL TO ORDER

       Chair Wong called the meeting to order at 9:30 a.m.

APPROVAL OF MINUTES

      Chair Wong asked if there were any corrections or additions to the October 18-19, 2017
meeting and site visit minutes. There were no corrections or comments. Commissioner Estes
moved to approve the October 18-19, 2017 minutes. Commissioner Mahi seconded the motion.
The minutes were unanimously approved by voice vote (7-0-2 excused).

TENTATIVE MEETING SCHEDULE

Executive Officer Orodenker provided the following:
   • The regular tentative meeting schedule has been distributed in the handout material for
       the Commissioners for the following dates and docket numbers.
             •   NOV 21- Hono`uli`uli Special Permits on Oahu, Adopt
                 SP17-408 AES Lawai Solar, A17-804 Hawaii Memorial Park-
                 EIS Accepting Authority
             •   DEC 6- 7- A15-798 Waikapu (Maui) and Adopt SP17-409
                 Hono`uli`uli Special Permit
             •   JAN 10- A15-798 Waikapu (Maui) cont., A04-751 Pulelehua
                 (Maui Land & Pine)- Motion to Amend
             •   JAN 24- Status reports A00-791 Lanihau and A10-788
                 HHFDC (NELHA in Kona)

Any questions or conflicts, please contact LUC staff.

ADOPTION OF ORDER
DR17-59 MONSANTO COMPANY, a Delaware corporation
To Consider Declaratory Order to Designate Important Agricultural Lands for approximately
1,550 acres at Kunia, Oʽahu identified by TMK Nos. (1) 9-2-001-001 (por.); (1) 9-2-001-005; and
(1) 9-2-004-009


APPEARANCES
Mark Murakami, Esq., attorneys for Petitioner Monsanto Company
Dan Clegg, Monsanto Company Representative
City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP)
provided notice that they would not be appearing.
Dawn Takeuchi Apuna, Esq. for State Office of Planning (“OP”)
Rodney Funakoshi, Land Use Administrator, OP

      Chair Wong updated the record, and described the procedures for the hearing. There
were no questions or comments on the procedures.
      Chair Wong called for Public Witnesses and swore each witness in before hearing
their testimony.

PUBLIC WITNESSES:
  1. Felicia Cowden
     Ms. Cowden asked why the DR17-59 Oahu Docket was being heard on Kaua`i
  and for clarification of the IAL process. Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker explain
  that the decision to approve the docket had already been made and that this was the
  administrative adoption of the form of the order to complete the proceedings on the
  matter; and described the IAL designation process.


                                                                                                  2
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
        There no other public witnesses.

    Chair Wong called for the Parties to make their presentations.

CLOSING ARGUMENTS
     None

      Commissioner Ohigashi moved to adopt the order. Commissioner Chang
seconded the motion.

        Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker poll the Commission.

       The Commission unanimously voted in favor of adopting the form of the order. (7-0-2
excused).

      Chair Wong declared a recess at 9:39 a.m. and reconvened the meeting at 9:40 a.m. and
moved on to the next agenda item.

HEARING AND ACTION
A17-803 KEALIA PROPERTIES, LLC- (Kaua`i)
To Consider Petitioner’s Motion to Designate the Land Use Commission as Approving
Authority for Environmental Statement Under HRS Chapter 343 and For Authority to Prepare
Environmental Impact Statement Preparation Notice.

Chair Wong called for the Parties identify themselves.

APPEARANCES
Curtis Tabata, Esq. and Benjamin Matsubara, Esq., Counsel for Kealia Properties,
LLC (“KP”)
Jodi Higuchi, Esq. Deputy Corporation Counsel, for County Planning
Department (“County”)
Jay Cua, Planner, County
Dawn Takeuchi Apuna, Esq., Deputy Attorney General, for State Office of Planning
(“OP”)
Rodney Funakoshi, Land Use Administrator, OP

        Chair Wong updated the record, and described the procedures for the hearing. Chair
Wong asked if Petitioner had been made aware of and was agreeable to the LUC’s
hearing expenses reimbursement policy. Mr. Tabata acknowledged that Petitioner was


                                                                                              3
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
aware of and would comply with the reimbursement policy. There were no questions
or comments on the procedures

        Chair Wong called for Public Witnesses and swore each witness in before hearing
their testimony.


PUBLIC WITNESSES:
     1. Timothy Reis
         Mr. Reis requested clarification on the process involved with the proposed
     project and the environmental impact statement. Mr. Tabata described how the
     environmental impact statement (EIS) information was being gathered and took
     Mr. Reis’ contact information to provide follow up information.
         Commissioner Scheuer commented that the Commission’s action was limited
     in scope to agree to be the accepting authority for the EIS at this meeting.

        There were no other witnesses.

PRESENTATION
Petitioner
       Mr. Tabata made his presentation to the Commission and argued why the LUC
should be the accepting authority for the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and
why an EIS was warranted; and described the reasons why his motion should be
granted.
       Commissioner Chang requested clarification on whether the EIS would include
an Archaeological Inventory Survey and Cultural Impact Assessment. Mr. Tabata
responded that the EIS would address the issues that the State Historic Preservation
Division (SHPD) would be concerned with.

AGENCY COMMENTS
County
     The County stated that it had no objection to the motion.
     There were no questions for County.

OP
        Ms. Apuna stated that OP had no objection to the motion.
        There were no questions for Ms. Apuna.

        There were no further questions.
                                                                                       4
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
DECISION MAKING

      Commissioner Estes moved to approve the Petition. Commissioner Mahi
seconded the motion.
      Commissioner Ohigashi offered a friendly amendment to include that the motion
would:

        1) Identify the Commission as the “accepting authority,” to review and accept the
           applicant’s proposed actions pursuant to Chapter 343, HRS; and,

        2) Direct the Petitioner to prepare an EISPN because the Commission determined, based
           on its judgment and experience, that under Chapter 343-5(e), HRS, the proposed
           action may have significant effects requiring the preparation of a full environmental
           impact statement.

        3) Authorize the Executive Officer to notify and submit a record of the Commission s
           decision to Kealia and OEQC by the November 15, 2017, deadline. It was further
           recommended that the motion specify that the Commission authorizes the Chair to
           sign any Order on this matter on behalf of the Commission.

       Commissioners Estes and Mahi had no objection to the friendly amendment.
       Commissioner Scheuer requested clarification that the specifics of the motion
and its friendly amendment just addressed the LUC’s role as accepting authority and
not the approval of the EIS. Chair Wong acknowledged that the motion was limited to
the LUC’s being the accepting authority.

        There was no further discussion.

        Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker poll the Commission.

     The Commission unanimously voted in favor of the motion with the friendly
amendment. (7-0-2 excused).

      Chair Wong declared a recess at 9:59 a.m. and reconvened the meeting at 10:10 a.m. and
moved on to the next agenda item.



HEARING AND ACTION
SP17-408-AES LAWA'I SOLAR, LLC, (Kaua`i), a Delaware limited liability company,
To Consider Petition for a State Land Use Permit, a Class IV Zoning Permit, and a Special
Permit for real property situated at Kōloa and Lāwa'i, Kona, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, identified by
                                                                                               5
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
Kaua'i Tax Map Key No. (4) 2-6-003:001 (por.).

APPEARANCES
Curtis Tabata, Esq. and Benjamin Matsubara, Esq., represented AES Lāwa’i Solar, LLC,
(“AES”)
Jodi Higuchi, Esq., Deputy Corporation Counsel, represented County of Kaua`i
Planning Department (“County”)
Ka’aina Hull, Deputy Director, County
Dale Cua, Planner, County
Dawn Takeuchi Apuna, Esq., Deputy Attorney General, for State Office of Planning
(“OP”)
Rodney Funakoshi, OP

       Chair Wong updated the record and explained the procedures to be followed for
the proceedings.

        There were no other questions, comments or objections to the procedures.

DISCLOSURES

        Commissioner Scheuer disclosed that he had been a consultant for the
Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL) in negotiations with the Kaua’i Island
Utility Cooperative (KIUC). Chair Wong asked the Parties if there was any objection to
Commissioner Scheuer’s continued participation. There were no objections.

        Chair Wong called for Public Witnesses

PUBLIC WITNESSES
     None

PRESENTATION
Petitioner
       Mr. Tabata made his presentation to the Commission and argued why the
Special Permit should be granted.
       Commissioners Cabral, Ohigashi, Chang and Scheuer requested clarification on
Mr. Tabata’s presentation.



County


                                                                                       6
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
      Ms. Higuchi stated that County was in support of the permit and recommended
approval with conditions.
      There were no questions for Ms. Higuchi.

OP
       Ms. Apuna stated that OP had reviewed the permit and recommended the
deletion of Conditions 22 and 23; and that the Commission approve the permit with
those changes.

DECISION MAKING
     Chair Wong entertained a motion.

      Commissioner Cabral moved to approve the Special Permit application for AES
Lāwaʼi Solar, LLC subject to the conditions as recommended by the Kauaʼi Planning
Commission in their Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order
dated September 26, 2017; with the following changes:
         • deletion of conditions 22 and 23 as requested by OP;
         • amendment to Condition 7 to require LUC approval of any time
              extensions to the Special Permit;
         • amendment to Condition 18 to clarify that any relief would be granted by
              the County Planning Commission;
         • amendment to Condition 14 to require Petitioner’s submittal of a SHPD-
              approved Archaeological Monitoring Plan before work begins; and,
         • request staff to make any changes for renumbering, grammar, spelling,
              Hawaiian diacriticals, and clarity that is necessary

Discussion
       Chair Wong stated that he would be voting in favor of the motion and described
his support of alternative energy sources.
       Commissioner Scheuer stated that he also was voting in favor of the motion and
expressed his appreciation to all concerned with the special permit application effort.

        Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker poll the Commission.

        The Commission unanimously voted in favor of the motion. (7-0-2 excused).

        Chair Wong declared at recess at 10:59 a.m. and reconvened the meeting at 11:01 a.m.

        Discussion ensued regarding the remaining items on the agenda.

                                                                                               7
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
       Commissioner Ohigashi moved to amend the agenda and to have the Executive
    Session that was scheduled for November 9, 2017 rescheduled to start at 12:30 p.m.
    on November 8, 2017. Commissioner Mahi seconded the motion. By unanimous
    voice vote (7-0-2 excused), the Commission voted to amend the agenda and begin
    the Executive Session as proposed.

        The Commission went into recess at 11:03 a.m. and reconvened at 12:30 p.m.

      Commissioner Chang moved to enter into Executive Session. Commissioner
Scheuer seconded the motion. By unanimous voice vote (7-0-2 excused), the
Commission voted to enter into Executive Session.

         The Commission reconvened in regular session at 2:30 p.m.

        There being no further business, Chair Wong adjourned the meeting at 2:30 p.m.




                                                                                         8
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)
November 8, 2017
