                                 LAND USE COMMISSION
                                   MEETING MINUTES
                               November 21, 2017 – 9:30 a.m.
                      Airport Conference Center, Meeting Room IIT#3
                              400 Rodgers Boulevard, Suite 700,
                                    Honolulu, HI 96819


COMMISSIONERS PRESENT:              Arnold Wong
                                    Nancy Cabral
                                    Aaron Mahi
                                    Jonathan Scheuer
                                     Gary Okuda
                                     Dawn Chang




COMMISSIONERS EXCUSED:              Edmund Aczon
                                    Lee Ohigashi
                                    Linda Estes


LUC STAFF PRESENT:                  Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer
                                    Russell Suzuki, First Deputy Attorney
                                    General
                                    Bert Saruwatari, Staff Planner
                                    Scott Derrickson, Staff Planner
                                    Riley Hakoda, Staff Planner/Chief Clerk


COURT REPORTER:                     Jean McManus


CALL TO ORDER


       Chair Wong called the meeting to order at 9:30 a.m.


APPROVAL OF MINUTES


      Chair Wong asked if there were any corrections or additions to the November 8th, 2017
meeting minutes. There were none. Commissioner Scheuer moved to approve the minutes
and Commissioner Mahi seconded the motion.

       The minutes were unanimously approved by voice vote (6 ayes-0 nays- 3 excused).
TENTATIVE MEETING SCHEDULE

Executive Officer Orodenker provided the following:
   • The regular tentative meeting schedule has been distributed in the handout material for
       the Commissioners for the following dates and docket numbers.

             •DEC 6- 7- A15-798 Waikapu (Maui) and Adopt Hono̒uli̒uli
              Special Permit
          • JAN 10- A04-751 Pulelehua- Maui Land and Pine-Motion to
              Amend; and residual business (if any) A15-798 Waikapu
              Town (Maui)
        Any questions or conflicts, please contact LUC staff.
        There were no questions or comments on the schedule.

ADOPTION OF ORDER
SP17-408-AES LAWA̒I SOLAR, LLC, (Kaua̒i),
Petition for a State Land Use Permit, a Class IV Zoning Permit, and a Special Permit for
real property situated at Kōloa and Lāwa̒̒i, Kona, Kaua̒i, Hawai'i, identified by Kaua̒i Tax
Map Key No. (4) 2-6-003:001 (por.).

APPEARANCES
Curtis Tabata, Esq. represented AES Lāwa̒i Solar, LLC, (“AES”)
County of Kaua̒i notified the LUC they would not be in attendance at the hearing.
Dawn Takeuchi Apuna, Esq., Deputy Attorney General, for State Office of Planning
(“OP”)
Lorene Maki, Planner, OP

       Chair Wong updated the record and explained the procedures to be followed for
the proceedings.

        There were no questions, comments or objections to the procedures.

        Chair Wong called for Public Witnesses

PUBLIC WITNESSES:
     None

        There were no closing arguments.
        Chair Wong entertained a motion.

                                                                                               2
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
       Commissioner Cabral moved to adopt the order. Commissioner Mahi seconded
the motion.
       Commissioner Okuda stated that he had reviewed the record and the November
8, 2017 meeting transcripts regarding this docket. Chair Wong acknowledged
Commissioner Okuda’s comment.

        Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker poll the Commission.

       The Commission unanimously voted in favor of adopting the form of the order. (6-0-3
excused).

      Chair Wong declared a recess at 9:37 a.m. and reconvened the meeting at 9:40 a.m. and
moved on to the next agenda item.

HEARING AND ACTION
A17-804 HAWAII MEMORIAL LIFE PLAN, LTD.
To Consider Petitioner’s Motion to Designate the Land Use Commission as Approving
Authority for Environmental Statement Under HRS Chapter 343 and For Authority to Prepare
Environmental Impact Statement Preparation Notice.

APPEARANCES
Curtis Tabata, Esq. represented Hawaii Memorial Life Plan, Ltd., (“HMP”)
Eugene Takahashi, Acting Section Chief, -City and County of Honolulu Department of
Planning and Permitting ("DPP")
Dawn Takeuchi Apuna, Esq., Deputy Attorney General, for State Office of Planning
(“OP”)
Lorene Maki, OP

       Chair Wong updated the record and explained the procedures to be followed for
the proceedings.

      Chair Wong asked if Petitioner was aware of and agreeable to the Commission’s
reimbursement policy. Mr. Tabata acknowledged that Petitioner was aware of and
would comply with the Commission's reimbursement policy.

        There were no other questions, comments or objections to the procedures.

        Chair Wong called for Public Witnesses

                                                                                              3
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
PUBLIC WITNESSES:
     None

DISCLOSURES
       Commissioner Okuda disclosed that he had communicated and dealt with
Hawaiian Memorial Park regarding funeral, inurnment and interment arrangements for
family members; but believed that he could remain fair and impartial during the
proceedings on this matter.
       There were no objections to Commissioner Okuda’s continued participation.
       Commissioner Chang disclosed that she had performed consulting work for
Hawaiian Memorial Park 5-7 years ago, but believed that she could remain fair and
impartial during the proceedings.
       There were no objections to Commissioner Chang’s continued participation.
       Commissioner Scheuer described his role with the Hawaiian Island Land Trust
and his awareness of some preliminary business discussions occurring between
Hawaiian Memorial Park and the Hawaiian Island Land Trust; but believed that he
could remain fair and impartial during the proceedings.
       There were no objections to Commissioner Scheuer’s continued participation.
       Chair Wong disclosed that his family members had used Hawaiian Memorial’s
cemetery services; but felt that he could remain fair and impartial during the
proceedings.
       There were no objections to Chair Wong’s continued participation.

        There were no other disclosures.

        Chair Wong called for the Petitioner to make its presentation

PRESENTATION
Petitioner
       Mr. Tabata made his presentation to the Commission and argued why the LUC
should be the accepting authority for the Environmental Impact Statement ("EIS") and
why an EIS was warranted; and described the reasons why his motion should be
granted.

AGENCY COMMENTS
County
     The County stated that it had no objection to the motion.
     There were no questions for County.
                                                                                       4
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
OP
        Ms. Apuna stated that OP had no objection to the motion.
        There were no questions for Ms. Apuna.

        There were no further questions.

      Commissioner Chang moved to enter into Executive Session. Commissioner
Scheuer seconded the motion. By unanimous voice vote (6-0-3 excused), the
Commission voted to enter into Executive Session 09:49 a.m. and reconvened the meeting
at 10:00 a.m.

DECISION MAKING

      Commissioner Mahi moved to approve the Petition. Commissioner Cabral
seconded the motion.
      Commissioner Okuda requested clarification on whether Commissioner Mahi’s
motion would:

        1) Identify the Commission as the “accepting authority,” to review and accept the
           applicant’s proposed actions pursuant to Chapter 343, HRS; and,

        2) Direct the Petitioner to prepare an EISPN because the Commission determined, based
           on its judgment and experience, that under Chapter 343-5(e), HRS, the proposed
           action may have significant effects requiring the preparation of a full environmental
           impact statement.

        3) Authorize the Executive Officer to notify and submit a record of the Commission s
           decision to OEQC by the November 15, 2017, deadline. It was further recommended
           that the motion specify that the Commission authorizes the Chair to sign any Order
           on this matter on behalf of the Commission.

       Commissioner Mahi acknowledged his agreement with Commissioner Okuda’s
understanding of the motion. Commissioner Cabral also acknowledged and agreed
with Commissioner Okuda’s understanding of the motion.
       Commissioner Scheuer requested clarification that the specifics of the motion
and its friendly amendment just addressed the LUC’s role as accepting authority and
not the approval of the EIS. Chair Wong acknowledged that the motion was limited to
the LUC’s being the accepting authority.

        There was no further discussion.
                                                                                                5
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
        Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker poll the Commission.

     The Commission unanimously voted in favor of the motion with the friendly
amendment. (6-0-3 excused).

      Chair Wong declared a recess at 10:03 a.m. and reconvened the meeting at 10:05 a.m.
and moved on to the next agenda item.

HEARING AND ACTION
SP17-409 HONO̒ULI̒ULI WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT- Secondary Treatment and
Support Facility – State Special Use Permit No. 2017/SUP-2

APPEARANCES
Guy Inouye, Branch Chief, Hono̒uli̒uli Wastewater Treatment Plant (“HWWTP”)
Jim Niermann, R. M. Towill Consultant for HWWTP
Eugene Takahashi, Acting Section Chief, -City and County of Honolulu Department of
Planning and Permitting (DPP)
Jeffery Lee, Planner, DPP
Dawn Takeuchi Apuna, Esq., Deputy Attorney General, for State Office of Planning
(“OP”)
Lorene Maki, OP

       Chair Wong updated the record and explained the procedures to be followed for
the proceedings.

        There were no other questions, comments or objections to the procedures.

        Chair Wong called for Public Witnesses

PUBLIC WITNESSES:
None

        Chair Wong called for Petitioner to make its presentation.
PRESENTATION
Petitioner
       Mr. Niermann made his presentation to the Commission and argued why the
Special Permit should be granted. Mr. Niermann and Mr. Inouye responded to
requests for clarification on Petitioner’s presentation from Commissioners Cabral,
Chang and Scheuer.

                                                                                            6
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
       Chair Wong stated that he had failed to get acknowledgment from Mr.
Niermann and Mr. Inouye that the testimony they were providing to the Commission
was truthful. Mr. Niermann and Mr. Inouye affirmed that their testimonies were
truthful.

County
     Mr. Takahashi stated that County was in support of the permit and
recommended approval.
     There were no questions for Mr. Takahashi.

OP
         Ms. Apuna stated that OP had reviewed the permit and expressed its support for
the expansion of the HWWTP to accommodate secondary treatment and support
facilities. OP acknowledged Petitioner’s plans to file both a motion to amend the
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order issued in Docket No.
A88-627 to bifurcate TMK: 9-1-069: 3 from the original reclassification and a district
boundary amendment petition to reclassify the Petition Area to the State Land Use
Urban District.
        There were no questions for Ms. Apuna.

DECISION MAKING
     Chair Wong entertained a motion.

   Commissioner Okuda moved to approve the Special Permit application for the
HWWTP. Commissioner Mahi seconded the motion.

Discussion
        Commissioner Okuda described the reasons why he had moved to approve the
Special Permit application and why it should not be a precedent for other permits.
        Commissioner Scheuer described his disappointment with the need to approve a
Special Permit in lieu of a District Boundary Amendment ("DBA") for the HWWTP
since it appeared that there was sufficient time to be more efficient in this matter.

       Chair Wong declared a recess at 10:45 a.m. and reconvened the proceedings at
10:47 a.m.
       Chair Wong echoed Commissioner Scheuer’s disappointment that a DBA had
not been pursued earlier.
       Commissioner Cabral expressed her concerns about the compatibility of the
landscaping of the proposed project with areas beyond the project boundaries.
                                                                                       7
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
        Commissioner Okuda stated that he wished to clarify that his motion:
        1. Required that the metes and bounds map and description be signed
        and stamped by a registered professional land surveyor and that
        copies of the map and description be provided to the LUC;
        2. Required the submittal and approval of a TIAR to the DOT,
        Highways Division;
        3. Required Petitioner to obtain the approval of the LUC for any time
        extension to the deadline by which Petitioner is to apply for a State
        Land Use District Boundary Amendment with the LUC and to file a
        motion to amend the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
        Decision and Order issued in Docket No. A88-627;-
        4. Added an additional condition to require Petitioner to cease all work and
        immediately contact the SHPD and O̒ahu Burial Council in the
        event historic or cultural resources are identified during demolition and/or
        construction activities and to obtain an archaeological clearance from
        the SHPD if required;
        5. Required Petitioner to obtain the approval of the LUC for any time
        extension to the deadline by which Petitioner is to establish the
        Project;
        6. Authorized staff to make non-substantive changes to the conditions,
        as appropriate, regarding formatting, style, and other modifications
        to ensure consistency; and
        7. Authorized the Chair to sign the Order in this matter on behalf of the
        Commission.

        Commissioner Mahi stated that he agreed with Commissioner Okuda’s
clarification.
        There was no further discussion.

        Chair Wong had Mr. Orodenker poll the Commission.

        The Commission unanimously voted in favor of the motion. (6-0-3 excused)

       Commissioner Cabral moved to enter into Executive Session. Commissioner
Mahi seconded the motion. By unanimous voice vote (6-0-3 excused), the Commission
voted to enter into Executive Session.

        The Commission entered Executive Session at 10:59a.m.


                                                                                       8
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
      (Commissioner Scheuer excused himself from the meeting with the approval of
the Chair at 11:03 a.m. and did not return.)

EXECUTIVE SESSION
To consult with the Commission’s attorney regarding the Commission’s duties, rights,
responsibilities and obligations under chapter 343, HRS and section 91-8, HRS.

         The Commission reconvened in regular session at 12:20 p.m.

       There being no further business to address, Chair Wong adjourned the meeting
at 12:20 p.m.




                                                                                       9
LUC Meeting Minutes (Please refer to LUC transcript for more details on this matter)

November 21, 2017
