                                                                                                               DAVID Y. IGE
            OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                                                    GOVERNOR

                                                                                                       LEO R. ASUNCION
            STATE OF HAWAII                                                                                       DIRECTOR
                                                                                                        OFFICE OF PLANNING

             235 South Beretanla Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813             ihone:                  (808) 587-2846
             Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                      Fax:                  (808) 587-282
                                                                                         Web:      hllp://planninQ.hawail.gov/



Ref. No. P-15745

                                                                                                           •
                                              September 19, 2017                         r-

                                                                                              J      CM


                                                                                         C3
                                                                                                       ' : n
Mi'. Michael A. Dahilig, Director
                                                                                           1          ru
Department of Planni g                                                                    no
County of Kauai
4444 Rice Street, Suite 473                                                               X)          5 .-A

Lihue, Hawaii 96766                                                                       WJ

                                                                                              03
Dear Mr. Dahilig:

       Subject: AES Lawai Solar, LLC
                    Project: Use Permit No. U-2018-1
                       Class IV Zoning Permit No. Z-IV-2018-1
                       Special Permit No, SP-2018-2
                    Tax Map Keys: 2-6-003: 001 (Por.)
                    Location: Koloa and Lawai, Kauai, Hawaii

       Thank you for the opportunity to review the subject application for a Special Use Permit
to establish a 28-megawatt (MW) solar photovoltaic (PV) system in Koloa and Lawai, Kauai.
The proposed project will consist of sola panels and appurtenant facilities on an approximately
196.33-acre portion of a 1,062.291-acre lot located within the State Agricultural District and in
the County of Kauai Agricultu e and Open Districts, The Petition Area is owned by McBryde
Sugar Company, LLC, which is leasing to the Petitioner AES Lawai Solar, LLC (Petitioner)
e sements to operate the system. The Petitioner plans to sell the electric powe to Kauai Island
Utility Cooperative (KIUC), KIUC will be constructing a substation adjacent to the Petition
Area on pproximately 2.5 acres. The substation will collect the produced solar energy and
connect it to the KIUC s island-wide electric g id. The system is unique because it will feed the
elect ical power generated by the system into Battery Energy Storage System ( BESS ), which
will also discharge the stored power into the KIUC grid du ing the non-daylight, peak hours.

       Petitione and KIUC have entered into a 25-year Power Purchase Agreement. Petitioner
is an affiliate of AES Distributed Energy, Inc, a wholly owned subsidiary of The AES
Corporation. The PV system will consist of ground-mounted solar panels on a single-axis
trackers which will rotate along a fixed horizontal axis from east to west following the sun,
which increases the efficiency of the system. The electrical output of the panels will either be
directed to the BESS to be stored or go di ectly into the power grid operated by KIUC. The
substation will be constructed concurrently with the solar project, and connected with
underground lines.
Mr. Michael Dahilig, Director
September 19, 2017
Page 2



        The solar project site will be surrounded by a 7-foot high chain link sec ity fence, with a
25-foot wide buffer around the security fence. The average height of the solar panels will be 7.5
feet above ground level. The distance between the solar panel rows will ange fro 18 feet in
the south section to 25 feet in the north section.

       The Petition Area is not on any Important Agricultural Lands (IAL), The landowner has
designated other lands as IAL.

        The guidelines for Special Permits are contained within Hawaii Administrative Rules
(EAR) § 15-15-95 which allow ce tain unusual and easonable uses within Agricultural and
Rural Districts other than those for which the district is classified, EAR § 15-15-95 lists six (6)
guidelines for determining whether a roposed use is “unusual and reasonable.” The following
assesses the roposed project relative to the Special Pe mit guidelines:

    1. The use shall not be contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished by
        Chapters 205 and 205A, HRS, an the rules of the Commission.

       Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 205 seeks to rotect ag icultural lands and
       ensure then continued availability for agricultural use. It rovides that the Agricultural
       District shall include lands with a high capacity for agricultural production, grazing, or
       other agricultural uses. Chapter 205 also recognizes, however, that some lands in the
       Agricultural District may not be suit ble for the uses per itted in the Agricultural
       Dist ict and, therefore, other uses may be allowed with a Special Permit.

       Pursuant to HRS §§ 205-2 and 205-4.5, as a ended by Act 55 and Act 52, solar energy
       facilities may be permitted on land with Class B or C soils. More spec fically, HRS §§
       205-2 and 205-4.5 state the following:

           ® HRS § 205-2(6)(A) and (B): Solar energy facilities may be permitted on land
              with soil classified by the LSB as overall (master) productivity rating cl ss B, C,
               D, or E. Solar energy facilities placed within l nd rated Class B or C, however,
               shall not occupy more than ten percent of the acreage of the arcel, or 20 acres of
               land, whichever is lesse , unless a s ecial use permit is granted.

               The proposed project requires a Special Permit as it would occupy more than 10%
               of the Petition Area and more than 20 acres of land, At 196.33 acres, the Petition
                 rea occupies app oximately 18% of the 1,062.291-acre parcel. The parcel
               contains lands designated with A, B, C, D and E. However, the majority of the
               area to be occupied by the solar project is B and C lands, with some E lands. The
Mr, Michael Dahilig, Di ector
September 19, 2017
Page 3


                Petitioner should provide the approximate l nd area in acres that would be
                within LSB designated B and C soils.

             • HRS § 205-4,5(a)(3): Within the Ag icultura District, the raising of livestock,
                including poultry, bees, fish, o other animal o aquatic life that are p opagated for
                economic or personal use a e permitted.

                The proposed pastu age of sheep, in combination with the solar energy facility, is
                an allowable use. The Petitioner pro oses to lease the usable portions of the
                Petition Area to Omao Fa ms, a indicated in Petitioner s Exhibit E-8 to sheep
                grazing at least 50% belo the fair market rental value,

            ® HRS § 205-4,5(a)(21)(A),(B) and (C): Solar energy facilities on land ated Class
                B o C for which a special use permit is granted are permitted provided that:

                (A) The area occupied by the sola ene gy facilities is also made available for
                       compatible agricultural ctivities at a lease ate that is at least fifty per cent
                       below the fair market rent fo compa able roperties;
                (B) P oof of financial security to decom ission the facility is provided to the
                       satisfaction of the approp iate county planning commission prio to date of
                        commencement of comme ci l, gene ation; and
                (C) Solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned at the owner’s expense
                       and according to certain requi ements.

                The Applicant epresents that each of the above criteria would be met.

      Coastal Zone Management. Page 9 of the application indicates that the larger parcel,
      including the Petition A ea is not within the Special Management Area, however,
      regarding the objectives of HRS Chapter 205A, the application does not have a sepa ate
      section add essing the p oject’s compliance with applicable Coastal Zone Management
         (CZM) prog am objectives and policies, While it appears that the proposed use is not
         contra y to the objectives of the program, the application should include a section
         detailin responses to the objectives of HRS Chapter 205A.

      Historic Resou ces. An archaeological invento y survey (AIS) has been p ovided, We
      note that the State Historic Preserv tion Division (SHPD) has not accepted the AIS,
       cco ding to a letter dated August 30, 2017, However, SHPD indicated that the draft AIS
      provides adequate information, and provided the Petitioner with a list of co ections and
      changes to incorpo ate into a revised AIS. As a mitigation measure, SHPD indicates that
Mr. Michael Dahilig, Director
September 19, 2017
Page 4


      a archaeological monitoring plan should be prepared for one site (Site 1051) to guide
      monitoring, and that SliPD must accept the plan p ior to work onsite.

      The Petitioner should obtain approval for the revised AIS prior to any work being
      done in the Petition Are . Also, SHPD should approve the monitorin plan prior to
      any woi k onsite. Lastly, a condition relating to inadvertent findings should also be
      inclu ed. These items should be made conditions of approval,

      Cultu al Impact Assessment. The Petitione has also submitted a draft Cultu al Impact
      Assessment (CIA). Upon consultation with the Petitioner, we note that a revised CIA
        ill be submitted to the Co ity at a later date. We unde stand that oral interviews will be
      included with the revised Assessment. OP recommends a condition that the final CIA
      should be included ith the submittal of the Special Permit to the Land Use
      Commission for its consideration.

      Flora and Fauna. The Petition includes information and p oposed mitigation measures
      for endangered, threatened and candidate species fo the larger prope ty and the Petition
      Area. We agree that the proposed recommendations as listed on pages 25-27 of the
      Petition should be made conditions of the app oval. In addition, OP would like to
      recommend the following.

                     a. Petitioner shall develop an endan ered species awareness
                           training module, which shall include all potential endangered
                           species that m y frequent the Petition a ea.

                     b. All const uction worke s and solar facility employees shall
                           undergo endan ered species awareness training prior to starting
                             ork.


   2. The desired use would not adversely affect surrounding property.

      According to the Petition, the proposed p oject is not anticipated to di ectly o indirectly
      affect adjacent uses, The larger property lies to the west of Koloa to n. The property is
      vacant, and was used primarily for sugar cane cultivation. A p ivate cane haul road
      extending from Koloa Road provides access to the property.

      Construction of the solar facilities would result in short-term impacts that are temporary,
      intermittent, and localized. Long-te m impacts related to operations and maintenance,
      including glare, noise, ambient temperature, and electric and m gnetic fields should be
      minimal.
Mr. Michael Dahilig, Director
September 19, 2017
Page 5


   3. The use would not unreasonably bur en public agencies to p ovide streets, se ers,
         water, drainage, schools, fire, and police resources.

         According to the ap lic tion, the proposed project would not re uire infrastructu e
         support from public agencies due to the following:

             • Access to the site is p ovided by a private agricultural road which extends from
                Koloa Road (State highway) and Aka Road (County Road), There is no public
                access to the site,
             • An Individual Wastewater System will be provided for bathroom facilities,
             • Potable water would be available from an existing waterline on the la ger
                  property, which is connected to the County water system, The water will be used
                  primarily for the bath oom facilities. There are water reservoirs on-site.
             • Drainage across the site currently exists in the form of su face runoff based on the
                  natural topography; the proposed project would not significantly alter the existing
                  d ainage patterns.
             • It would be unlikely to use fire or police p otection services.


   4. Unusual conditions, trends, and needs have arisen since the district boundaries and
       rules were established.

         OP recognizes the State interest in reducing our islands dependency on fossil fuels and
         increasing efficiency measures, with a goal to generate 40 percent clean energy by 2030.
         OP also recognizes the State interest in conserving the State’s agricultural land esource
         base and assuring the long-term availability of agricultu al lands fo agricultural use. OP
         acknowledges the proposed project seeks to balance these interests by providing both
          enewable energy generation and agricultural production at below-market value rent.

   5. The land upon which the proposed use is sought is unsuited fo the uses permitted
       within the district.

         The land upon which the proposed use is sought is suited for the uses permitted within
         the dist ict. As noted above, the project would be loc ted on lands that a e designated
         primarily B and C lands, as ated by the LSB p oductivity rating system. Under the
         ALISH system, the soils on the subject property are classified as Prime and Other.
Mr, Michael Da ilig, Di ector
September 19, 2017
Page 6


       Having reviewed the application and applied the available information to the applicable
Special Permit guideli es, OP supports the intent of the proposed p oject to p ovide renewable
energy fo the island of Kauai and offers the following comments:

         • Concerns will remain with regard to the statewide challenge in seek ng a bal nce of
            maintaining the availability of high quality agricultural lands while promoting
            renewable energy sources such as solar facilities on lands within the Agricultu al
            District,

         0 OP is concerned that while agi -voltaic projects such as this are technically
            feasible, the agricultural aspect of these projects often fail to be implemented as
             ep esented by the applicant, i.e. the number of sheep or other grazing animals co¬
            located within the solar facility is negligible, The p oposed p oject would be located
            on soils rated ALISH P ime; the p oposed sola facility would, the efore, p eclude
            productive agricultural land from being used for agricultural pu poses and
            cont ibuting to the State s goal of assuring the long-te m availability of agricultural
            lands for agricultural use if the pasturage of sheep does not occu , Petitioner should
            provide g eater assurances that the Petition A ea will be truly used for ma ketable
            sheep grazing for as long as the SEP system is in place.

       • Should the Special Permit be granted, OP recommends that the requi ements of
            HRS § 205-4,5(a)(21)(A), (B), and (C), relating to: 1) compatible ag icultu al
            activities; 2) proof of financi l security fo decommissioning; and
            3) decom issioning requirements, be included as specific conditions of approval.

       If you have any questions, please contact Lorene Maid of ou Land Use Division at
(808) 587-2888,


                                                  Since ely,




                                                  Leo R. Asuncion
                                                  Director

Attachment

cc: Land Use Commission
    Department of Agriculture
