                           BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                   OF THE STATE OF HA WAIT

In the Matter of the Application of )                     Docket No. SP17-408
                                                 )
AES LA WA SOLAR, LLC )                                    ORDER ADOPTING THE COUNTY OF
                                                 )        KAUAT PLANNING COMMISSION S
For a Special Use Permit to Establish )                   RECOMMENDATION, FINDINGS OF
a Solar Energy Facility on )                              FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND
approximately 196.33 acres of Land )                      DECISION AND ORDER TO APPROVE
within the State Land Use Agricultural )                  THE STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT,
District at Koloa and LawaT, )                            WITH MODIFICATIONS . AND
KauaT, HawaiT , Tax Map Key )                              CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
(4) 2-6-003:001 (portion). )
                                                 )

       ORDER ADOPTING THE COUNTY OF KAUAT PLANNING COMMISSION’S
 RECOMMENDATION. FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION
          AND ORDER TO APPROVE THE STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT. WITH
                             MODIFICATIONS

                                                     ND
                                 CERTIFICATE OF SE VICE
                                   : :   Thn; tsTctcertify that this is a true and correct
                                                      copy of the document on file in the office of the
                                                       State Land Use Commission, Honolulu, Hawai'i.




                                                          Daniel E. Orodenker, Executive Officer




SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
                           BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                 OF THE STATE OF HA WAT I

I the Matter of the Application of )                 Docket No. SP17-408
                                             )
AES LA WAT SOLAR, LLC )
                                             )
For a Special Use Permit to Establish )              ORDER ADOPTING THE COUNTY OF
a Solar Energy Facility on )                         KAUA PLANNING COMMISSION S
approximately 196.33 acres of Land )                 RECOMMENDATION, FINDINGS OF
within the State Land Use Agricultural )             FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND
District at Koloa and LawaT, )                       DECISION AND ORDER TO APPROVE
Kaua , HawaiT , Tax Map Key )                        THE STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT,
(4)2-6-003:001 (portion). )                          WITH MODIFICATIONS
                                             )

       ORDER ADOPTING THE COUNTY OF KAUAT PLANNING COMMISSION’S
RECOMMENDATION. FINDINGS OF FACT. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW. AND DECISION
          AND ORDER TO APPROVE THE STATE SPECIAL USE PERMIT. WITH
                             MODIFICATIONS


       On August 17, 2017, AES Lawa Solar, LLC ( Applicant ) filed an application for a

State Special Permit with the County of Kaua Planning Commission ("Planning Commission")

for an approximately 28 Megawatt utility-scale solar energy facility that will also incorporate a

battery storage system on approximately 196.33 acres of a 1,062.291 acre parcel of land in the

State Agricultural District, identified as Tax Map Key No. (4) 2-6-003:001 (portion), in Koloa

and Lawa , Island of Kaua , Hawai , pursuant to section 205-6, Hawai Revised Statutes

(“HRS ), and section 15-15-95 etseq., Hawai Administrative Rules (“HAR ).




                                                                                                    2
SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
        On September 12, 2017, the Director of the County of Kaua i Planning Department

( Kaua i PD ) submitted a report to the Planning Commission on the subject Application.

        On September 19, 2017, a Supplement #1 to the Planning Director s Report was

submitted to the Planning Commission.

        On September 26, 2017, a Supplement #2 to the Planning Director’s Report was

submitted to the Planning Commission.

        On September 26, 2017, the Planning Commission met to consider the Application. The

Planning Co mis ion approved the Application subject to 24 conditions of approval.

        On October 12, 2017, the Land Use Commission ( LUC ) received Rom the Planning

Com i ion an original, one paper copy, and one digital copy of the application documents

consisting of Exhibits 1-38, the Planning Commission’s Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,

and Decision and Order dated September 26, 2017, and a copy of the transcripts from the

Planning Commission’s September 26, 2017 hearing. LUC staff determined the filing was

complete as of this date.1 * 3

        On October 31, 2017, the LUC mailed the agenda and meeting notice to the Applicant,

State Office of Planning (“OP ), the Planning Commission, the Kaua i PD , and the Statewide

and Kaua i Island mailing lists for the scheduled November 8-9, 2017 LUC hearings.

        On November 2, 2017, the LUC received OP’s comment letter, which included a copy of

OP’s comment letter to the Kaua i PD dated September 19, 2017.




1 The 45-day decision making time period began as of the date the application was a complete filing.
Complete as of October 12, 2017 required a final decision be rendered by November 25, 2017.
                                                                                                       3
SP17-408 AES Lawah Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
        On November 8, 2017, the LUC met in Llhu e, Kaua i, Hawaiii, to consider the

Application.2 Curtis Tabata, Esq. and Benjamin Matsubara, Esq. appeared on behalf of the

Applicant; Deputy Planning Director Ka aina Hull, Planner Dale Cua, and Jodi Higuchi, Esq.,

Deputy Corporation Counsel, appeared on behalf of the Kaua i PD; and Rodney Funakoshi and

Deputy Attorney General Dawn Apuna, Esq., appeared on behalf of the OP. There was no

public testimony. At the meeting the Applicant provided a description of the Project relative to

SP guidelines under Section 15-15-95(c), HAR. After the presentation by the Applicant, the

LUC asked clarifying questions about the operation of the Project and its impacts. The Kaua i

PD provided a brief overview of its decision recommending approval of the Application and the

conditions it requested the Planning Commi ion to impose. OP summarized its position in

support of the Application as well as its written comments on the Planning Commission s

recommendation and Decision and Order, and OP’s proposed modifications to conditions

contained in the Planning Co is ion's recommendation and Decision and Order.

        Following discussion, a motion was made and seconded to approve the Special Permit

and adopt the Planning Commission's recommendation, findings of fact, conclusions of law, and

decision and order to approve the State Special Permit, with modifications as proposed by OP

and the LUC. By a vote tally of 7 ayes, 0 nays, and 2 excused, the motion ea ed.

        On November 13, 2017, the LUC mailed out the agenda and notice of hearing for the

November 21, 2017, LUC meeting in Honolulu, 0 ahu, to Petitioner, OP, the Kaua i PD, and the

Statewide and Kaua i mailing lists. 2




2 At the proceeding. Commissioner Scheuer disclosed that he served as a consultant on water issues to
the State of HawaFi, Department of Hawaiian Home Lands. There were no objections to Commissioner
Scheuer s participation in the proceeding.
                                                                                                        4
SP17-408 AES Lawah Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
           On November 21, 2017, the LUC conducted a meeting to adopt the form of the Order on

this docket in Honolulu, 0 ahu. The LUC provided an opportunity for public testimony.

           The LUC, having duly considered the complete record in this matter and the oral

arguments presented by the Applicant in this proceeding, together with public testimony, and a

motion having been duly made and seconded at a meeting conducted on November 8, 2017, in

Llhu e, HawaLi, to approve the recommendation of the Planning Commission, and the motion

having received the affirmative votes required by section 15-15-13, HAR, and there being good

cause for the motion, the LUC hereby ADOPTS the recommendation and findings of fact,

conclusions of law, and decision and order of the Planning Commission approving a State

Special Permit, with modifications as proposed by OP3 and the LUC4, and as agreed to by the

Applicant, for the Project within the Petition Area consisting of approximately 196.33 acres of

land in the State Land Use Agricultural District identified by Kaua i Tax Map Key No. (4) 2-6-

003:001 (portion) in Koloa and Lawa i, Kaua i, Hawaifi, and approximately shown on Exhibit

 A attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein, subject to the following conditions:




1. The solar utility facility shall be constructed and operated as represented. Any changes to

           the facility and/or operation shall be reviewed by the Kaua i PD to determine whether

           Planning Commission review and approval is required.




3 OP proposed omitting County Conditions 22 and 23 which were redundant as they were adequately
covered under County Condition 6.
4 The LUC approved the deletion of County Conditions 22 and 23; amendment to Count Condition 7 to
require LUC approval of any time extensions to the SP; amendment to County Condition 18 to clarify that
any relief would be granted by the County Planning Commission; amendment to County Condition 14 to
require Applicant s submittal of a SHPD-approved Archaeological Monitoring Plan before work begins
on the Project; and any necessary changes for renumberin , grammar, spelling, Hawaiian diacriticals, and
clarity.
                                                                                                       5
SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
2.     Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall be made

       available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50 percent below

       the fair market rent for comparable properties, as long as the Project is in operation.

       Compatible agricultural operations shall be established by the Applicant and its

       successors and/or assigns within six (6) months of the start of commercial power

       generation. Extensions to this deadline may be granted by the Director of the Kaua i PD

       for unforeseen extenuating circumstances. Additional consideration may be given if the

       Applicant is actively seeking to have such operations established.

3. If at any time during the term of the Special Permit no compatible agricultural operations

       exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for six (6) months, the Applicant shall

       notify the Director of the Kaua i PD in writing within 30 days of the end of the 6-month

       period. If requested by the Director of the Kaua i PD, the Applicant shall attend a

       meeting of the Planning Commission and submit a report to the Planning Commission

       detailing the Applicant s actual and reasonable efforts to establish compatible agricultural

       operations on the usable lands of the Petition Area. The Planning Commission may

       determine whether probable cause exists to re-evaluate the SP and to hold a hearing

       pursuant to the Rules of the Planning Commission. Extensions to the 6-month deadline

       may be granted by the Director of the KauaT PD for unforeseen extenuating

       circumstances.


4. The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the following from the

       Director of the Kaua i PD, prior to the issuance of a grading or building permit:

       a. Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing and grading activities from June 1 through

           September 15.


                                                                                                     6
SP17-408 AES Law i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
       b. A survey map accompanied by a metes and bounds description of the approved

           Petition Area.

       c. A site plan showing the area required under Condition 1, above, relating to the

           minimum land area to be made available for compatible agricultural use.

5. Prior to the closing of the building permit for the facility, the Applicant shall submit to

       the Kaua i PD proof of financial security, such as a letter of credit or similar assurance,

       from a creditworthy financial institution satisfactory to Kaua i PD. The security will

       remain in place for the duration of the operation of the Project, with evidence of same

       provided to the Director of the KauaT PD on an annual basis, in an amount approved by

       the Kaua i PD as sufficient to decommission the Project and restore the Petition Area to

       substantially the same physical condition as existed prior to the development of the

       facility.




       The Applicant shall decommission the facility, including removal of all equipment

       related to the facility, within twelve (12) months following the termination of operations

       of the facility. A change in project ownership or a change in ownership of the land

       subject to the SP, which war ants a new proof of financial security to decommission the

       Project, shall be submitted to the KauaT PD for processing through the Planning

       Commission, within three (3) months of the ownership change.




       The Applicant shall incorporate this condition in the license and/or lease agreement with

       the landowner, and said license and/or lease agreement shall be reviewed for approval by

       the KauaT PD.


                                                                                                     7
SP17-408 AES LawaT Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
6. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:

        a. Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training module, which

           shall include all potential endangered species that may frequent the Petition Area.

       b. All construction workers and solar facility employees shall undergo endangered

           species awareness training prior to starting work.

       c. In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed Threatened Species,

           Newell s Shearwater and other seabirds, external lighting shall be only of the

           following types: shielded lights, cut-off luminaries, or indirect lighting. Spotlights

           aimed upwards or spotlighting of structures, landscaping or the ocean shall be

           prohibited.

       d. Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.

       e. Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring at the Petition Area, and report

           occurrences to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.

7. The Applicant shall establish the Project within two (2) years of the date of the LUC’s

       Decision and Order approving the SP. Requests for extension of this deadline shall be

       submitted to the Director of the Kaua i PD prior to the expiration of the deadline. The

       LUC may grant an extension to the deadline to establish the Solar Project due to

       unforeseen circumstances that were beyond the control of the Applicant. This SP shall be

       valid for a period of thirty-five (35) years from the start of commercial operations,

       subject to further extensions upon a timely request for extension filed with the Planning

       Commission at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the SP's expiration.

       Approval of time extensions shall be required from the LUC.




                                                                                                    8
SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
8.     On or before December 31 of each year that the SP is in effect, the Applicant or its

       successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, OP, and the Kaua i PD that

       demonstrates the Applicant s compliance with conditions of the SP.

9. Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to significant

       increases in the number of PV panels; (2) amendments to the conditions of approval; (3)

       significant expansions of the Petition Area; or (4) change in uses of the Petition Area

       shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and the LUC.

       Minor modifications including minor additions to accessory uses and structures, and new

       incidental uses and structures in the Petition Area are subject to review and approval by

       the Director of the Kaua i PD.

10. The Applicant and/or landowner shall notify the Director of Kaua i PD of:

       a. Any change or transfer of licensee on the Petition Area.

       b. Any change in uses on the Petition Area.

       c. Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or

       d. Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.

11. Enforcement of the conditions of the SP shall be pursuant to the Rules of the Planning

       Co i sion, including the issuance of an order to show cause as to the reason the SP

       should not be revoked if the Planning Commission has reason to believe that there has

       been a failure to perform the conditions herein.

12. If the photovoltaic array creates a hazardous condition for pilots or motorists, the facility

       operator shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon notification by the State Department

       of Transportation, Air orts Division, or the Federal Aviation Administration.




                                                                                                    9
SP17-408 AES L wa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
13. If required to mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping shall be installed and maintained

        around the solar Project to screen it when viewed from Aka Road or Koloa Road. The

        Kaua i PD shall determine whether additional landscape screening is necessary and the

        degree to which it is provided.

14. In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains, structural remains,

        cultural deposits, artifacts, sand deposits, or sink holes, are identified during demolition

        and/or construction activities, all work shall cease in the immediate vicinity of the find,

       the find shall be protected from additional disturbance, and the State Historic

       Preservation Division ( SHPD ) and Kaua i Island Burial Council, as applicable, shall be

       contacted immediately. Without any limitation to any other condition found herein, if

       any burials or archaeological or historic sites are discovered during the course of

       construction of the facility, all construction activity in the vicinity of the discovery shall

       stop until the issuance of an archaeological clearance from the SHPD that mitigation

       measures have been implemented to its satisfaction. An Archaeological Monitoring Plan

       ( AMP ) that satisfies the requirements of section 13-279-4, HAR, shall be prepared to

       guide monitoring and be reviewed and accepted by SHPD before work begins.

15. The Applicant shall comply with the requirements of the State Department of Health, the

       County s Fire Department, the County's Department of Water, and the County's

       Department of Public Works, as well as any other applicable gove ment agencies.

16. The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices ("BMP s") during all

       phases of development in order to minimize erosion, dust, and sedimentation impacts of

       the Project to abutting properties.




                                                                                                       10
SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
17. The Applicant shall develop and operate the facility, including the implementation of

        measures to mitigate potential impacts of the Project, in substantial compliance with the

        representations made to the Planning Commission and the LUC as reflected in the

        Planning Commission's Decision and Order and this Decision and Order. Such

        mitigation measures include, but are not limited to, the use of temporary and permanent

        BMPs to ensure that the development and operation of the Project does not result in an

        increase in stormwater runoff that adversely impacts downstream properties. Failure to

        so develop the Petition rea may result in revocation of the SP.

18. To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and applicable

       prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the Applicant shall seek to hire

       Kaua i contractors, and shall seek to employ residents of Kaua i in temporary

       construction and permanent jobs. It is recognized that the Applicant may have to employ

       non-Kaua i residents for particular skilled jobs where no qualified Kaua i resident

       possesses such skills. For the purpose of this condition, the Planning Commission shall

       relieve the Applicant of this requirement if the Applicant is subjected to anti-competitive

       restraints on t ade or other monopolistic practice.

19. The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building techniques and

       operational methods for the Project, such as Leadership in Energy and Environmental

       Design ("LEED") standards or another comparable state approved, nationally recognized,

       and consensus-based guideline, standard, or system, and strategies, which may include

       but is not limited to recycling, natural lighting, extensive landscaping, solar panels, low-

       energy fixtures, low energy lighting and other similar methods and techniques. All such

       proposals shall be reflected on the plans submitted fo building permit review.


                                                                                                  11
SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
20.    The Plan ing Commi sion reserves the right to revise, add, or delete conditions of

       approval in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts the Project may create, or to

       revoke the permit through the proper procedures should conditions of approval not be

       complied with or be violated.

21. The Applicant is advised that additional government agency conditions may be imposed.

       It shall be the Applicant s responsibility to resolve those conditions with the respective

       agencies.


22. Prior to building permit submittal, the Applicant shall hold a public meeting for residents

       in the areas of Lawa i, Oma o, Kdloa, Kalaheo and Po ipu to review the construction

       plans for the solar Project to solicit input and mitigate where possible concerns raised.




SP17-408 AES LawaM Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
                                     ADOPTION OF ORDER

                 This ORDER shall take effect upon the date this ORDER is certified by this

Commission.


                 Done at Honolulu, Hawai i, this               , day of November, 2017, per

motion on November 8, 2017 in Llhu e, Kaua i.

                                            LAND USE COMMISSION

                                            STATE OF HA WAT I

 APPROVED AS TO FORM


 Deputy Attorney General




                                           ARNOLD WONG
                                            Chairperson and Commissioner




 Filed and effective on:



    11/22/17

 Certified by:




SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
                                                                    LAniJ U z n!'V !'l,:j 1
                                                                       state 0F ,u'; \n

                                                                    mil m 22 a i: 54



                             BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                 OF THE STATE OF HA WAT I

In the Matter of the Application of          ) Docket No. SP17-408
                                             )
AES LAWA I SOLAR, LLC                        )
                                             )
For a Special Use Permit to Establish        )
a Solar Energy Facility on                   ) CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
approximately 196.33 acres of Land           )
within the State Land Use Agricultural       )
District at Koloa and Lawah,                 )
Kaua i, HawaTi, Tax Map Key                  )
(4) 2-6-003:001 (portion).                   )
                                             )

                                 CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        I hereby certify that a copy of the foregoing document was duly served upon the following

AS INDICATED BELOW on November 22, 2017:

       LEO R. ASUNCION, JR., AICP, Director                        (HAND DELIVERY)
       Office of Planning, State of HawaTi
       235 South Beretania Street
        6th Floor, Leiopapa A Kamehameha Bldg.
       Honolulu, HawaPi 96813

       DAWN TAKEUCHI-APUNA, ESQ.                                   (HAND DELIVERY)
       Deputy Atto ey General
       Department of the Attorney General
       425 Queen Street
       Honolulu, HawaPi 96813
       Atto ey for the Office of Planning

       MICHAEL DAHILIG, Director                           (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
       Planning Department, County of KauaT                 RECEIPT REQUESTED)

SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
        4444 Rice Street
        Llhu e, Kaua i, Hawai i 96766

        KAUA I COUNTY PLAN ING COMMISSION (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
        c/o Planning Department, Co nty of Kaua i RECEIPT REQUESTED)
        4444 Rice Street
        Llhu e, Kaua i, HawaPi 96766

        JODI HIGUCHI, ESQ.                               (CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
        Office of the County Attorney                     RECEIPT REQUESTED)
        4444 Rice Street, Suite 220
        Llhu e, Kaua i, HawaPi 96766
        Attorney for Kaua i County Planning Department

        BENJAMIN M. MATSUBARA, ESQ. (CERTIFIED MATT., RETURN
        CURTIS T. TABATA, ESQ. RECEIPT REQUESTED
        888 Mililani Street, Third Floor
        Honolulu, HawaPi 96813
        Attorneys for Applicant




                       DATED: Honolulu, HawaPi 11/22/17




                                                                                   2
SP17-408 AES Lawa i Solar, LLC
Decision And Order
