                                                                                                                DAVID Y.IGE
              OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                                                    GOVERNOR

                                                                                                           LEO R. ASUNCION
              STATE OF HAWAII                                                                                         DIRECTOR
                                                                                                            OFFICE OF PLANNING

              235 South Beretania Street, room 600, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813                Telephone: (808) 587-2846
              Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                           Fax: (808) 587-2824
                                                                                               Web: http://planning.hawaii.gov/



                                                                                  DTS No.:201711020721

                                                 November 2, 2017

                                                                                                 F* -0
                                                                                                    a
To:              Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer                                                 <

                 Land Use Commission
                                                                                                  i
From:            Leo R. Asuncion, Director                              >    '                   I )
                 Office of Planning C \
                                                                                                 TJ
                                                                                                OJ
Subject:         AES Lawai Solar, LLC
                 Special Permit No. SP17-408                                                    CO
                 Tax Map Key: (4) 2-6-003: 001 (Por.)
                 Koloa and Lawai, Kauai, Hawaii

       The Office of Planning (OP) recommends approval of Special Permit Application, SP17-408,
AES Lawai Solar LLC (Petitioner), with minor amendments to the conditions imposed by the County
of Kauai Planning Commission.

      1. Relevant Statutory Provisions.
         Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 205-4.5(a)(21) allows solar energy facilities on lands with
         B or C rated soils pursuant to a special permit, provided that (1) the area occupied by the
         solar energy facility is also made available for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate
         that is at least fifty per cent below the fair market rent for comparable properties; (2) proof of
         financial security to decommission the facility is provided to the satisfaction of the
         appropriate county planning department prior to commencement of commercial power
         generation; and (3) the solar energy facility is decommissioned at the owner s expense within
         twelve months of the conclusion of operations or the facility’s useful life and the area is
         restored to its pre-development condition.

         The use of agricultural lands for solar energy facilities raises the issue of how to balance
         conflicting goals. Solar generation facilities provide an important source of renewable clean
         energy. There is a strong demand for the agricultural lands by solar companies because they
         are relatively cheap, generally located away from most residential centers, and are often on
         relatively flat terrain. The availability of agricultural land for solar energy generation,
         however, also has the effect of making agricultural land more expensive and less available
         for farming.

      2. Factual and Procedural Background.
         The Petitioner proposes to establish a 28-megawatt (MW) solar photovoltaic (PV) system in
         Koloa and Lawai, Kauai. The proposed project will consist of solar panels and appurtenant
         facilities on an approximately 196.33-acre portion of a 1,062.291-acre parcel located within
Mr. Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer
November 2, 2017
Page 2



         the State Agricultural District and in the County of Kauai Agriculture and Open Districts.
         The Petition Area is owned by McBryde Sugar Company, LLC, which is leasing easements
         to operate the system to the Petitioner. The Petitioner plans to sell the electric power to
         Kauai Island Utility Cooperative (KIUC). KIUC will be constructing a substation adjacent to
         the Petition Area on approximately 2.5 acres. The substation will collect the produced solar
         energy and connect it to the KIUC s island-wide electric grid. The system is unique because
         it will feed the electrical power generated by the system into a Battery Energy Storage
         System (BESS), which will discharge the stored power into the KIUC grid during the non¬
         daylight, peak hours.

         Petitioner and KIUC have entered into a 25-year Power Purchase Agreement. Petitioner is an
         affiliate of AES Distributed Energy, Inc. a wholly owned subsidiary of the AES Corporation.
         The PV system will consist of ground-mounted solar panels on single-axis trackers which
         will rotate along a fixed horizontal axis from east to west following the sun, which increases
         the efficiency of the system. The electrical output of the panels will either be directed to the
         BESS to be stored or go directly into the power grid operated by KIUC. The substation will
         be constructed concurrently with the solar project, and connected with underground lines.

   3. Issues of Concern.
         The guidelines for Special Permits are contained within Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR)
         § 15-15-95 which allow certain unusual and reasonable uses within Agricultural and Rural
         Districts other than those for which the district is classified. HAR § 15-15-95 lists six (6)
         guidelines for determining whether a proposed use is “unusual and reasonable.

         OP assessed the prepared project in relation to these guidelines. On September 19, 2017, the
         OP commented and provided recommendations to the Kauai Planning Department regarding
         the application, which were addressed as follows:

             a. Soil Productivity
                 OP requested that the Petitioner should provide the approximate land area in acres
                 that would be within Land Study Bureau (LSB) designated B and C soils. The
                 Petitioner provided LSB data that the entire area is composed of B, C and D-rated
                 soils as follows (Petitioner s Exhibit 38):

                     • B approximately 126 acres, (64.2%)
                     • C approximately 45 acres, (22.9%)
                     • D approximately 25 acres, (12.7%)

             b. Operations
                 Pursuant to HRS § 205-4.5(a)(21)(A),(B) and (C): Solar energy facilities are
                 permitted via special use permit with the following conditions:
Mr. Daniel Orodenker, Executive Officer
November 2, 2017
Page 3



                  (A) The area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made available for
                      compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty per cent
                      below the fair market rent for comparable properties;
                  (B) Proof of financial security to decommission the facility is provided to the
                      satisfaction of the appropriate county planning commission prior to date of
                      commencement of commercial generation; and
                  (C) Solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned at the owner s e pense and
                      according to certain requirements.

              The above have been reflected in conditions 2 and 5 (County of Kauai Planning
              Commission Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order).

          c. Flora and Fauna
              The applicant submitted a flora and fauna survey dated June 2017. During the
              survey, the consultant observed the endangered Flawaiian Moorhen and the black
              crowned night-heron. The study recommended certain mitigation measures. OP
              recommended that all mitigation measures recommended by the applicant’s
              consultant be required as a condition of approval (Petitioner’s Exhibits E-5, E-9),
              including the following:

                               i. Petitioner shall develop an endangered species awareness training
                                   module, which shall include all potential endangered species that
                                   may frequent the Petition area.

                              ii. All construction workers and solar facility employees shall
                                   undergo endangered species awareness training prior to starting
                                  work.


             The above were included in the Kauai Planning Commission’s condition 6
             (County of Kauai Planning Commission Findings of Fact, Conclusions
             of Law, and Decision and Order).

          d. Coastal Zone Management
              OP requested that the application should include a section addressing the objectives
              of HRS Chapter 205A. The revised application includes an amended section
              (Petitioner’s Exhibit 2) section detailing positive responses to the objectives of HRS
              Chapter 205A.

          e. Historic and Cultural Resources
              The OP comment to the Planning Department indicated that while an archaeological
              inventory survey (AIS) had been provided, the State Historic Preservation Division
              (S1TPD) had not accepted the AIS, according to a letter dated August 30, 2017.
Mr. Daniel Orodenlcer, Executive Officer
November 2, 2017
Page 4




                SHPD indicated that the draft AIS offers adequate information, and provided the
                Petitioner with a list of corrections and changes to incorporate into a revised AIS.

                The petitioner revised the AIS and addressed the list of corrections requested by the
                SHPD. The revised AIS was accepted by SHPD on September 15, 2017 (Petitioner s
                Exhibit 27) with the condition that the Archeological Monitoring Plan (AMP) be
                approved by SHPD.

                OP recommended that the final Cultural Impact Assessment (CIA) (Petitioner s
                Exhibit 28), should be included with the submittal of the Special Permit to the Land
                Use Commission for its consideration. The Petitioner has submitted a letter from the
                Principal Investigator of the CIA, which found no cultural practices within the
                proposed area. The consultant concluded that Should cultural or burial sites be
                identified during the future ground disturbance in the project area, all work will
                immediately cease and appropriate agencies will be notified (Petitioner’s exhibit
                29), with which OP concurs.

   4. Recommendation.
         Having reviewed the application and applied the available information to the applicable
         Special Permit guidelines, OP supports the intent of the proposed project to provide
         renewable energy for the island of Kauai, consequently OP recommends approval of this
         Special Permit.

         OP agrees with the conditions of approval from the County of Kauai Planning Commission
         Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order dated September 26, 2017.
         However, the OP recommends omitting conditions 22 and 23 as they are covered in
         condition 6.

         If you have any questions, please contact Tomas J. Oberding of our Land Use Division at
(808) 587-2888.




cc: Matsubara, Kotake & Tabata
      Department of Agriculture
      Kauai Planning Department

Enclosure

OP letter to Kauai Planning Department September 19, 2017
