DANIEL ORODENKER

DAVID Y.IGE

Executive Officer

Governor

Bert K. Saruwatari

DOUGLAS CHIN

Planner

Acting Lieutenant Governor

SCOTT A.K. DERRICKSON AICP
Planner

LUIS P. SALAVERIA
Director

LAND USE COM M ISSION

MARY ALICE EVANS

Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism
State of Hawai`i

Deputy Director

RILEY K. HAKODA
Chief Clerk/Planner

FRED A. TALON
Drafting Technician

Statement of
Daniel E. Orodenker
Executive Officer
Land Use Commission
Before the
House Committee on Agriculure
House Committee on Water and Land
Wednesday February 14, 2018
11:20 AM
State Capitol, Conference Room 325
In consideration of
HB 2665 HD1
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Chairs Creagan and Yamane; Vice Chairs DeCoite and Todd, and members of the
Committees on Agriculture; and, Water and Land:
The Land Use Commission supports HB 2665 HD1 that would require a State Special
Permit for solar energy facilities larger than 15 kilowatts proposed on State Agricultural District
lands on non-conforming residential subdivisions with Land Study Bureau (“LSB”) ratings of D
or E.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this matter.

235 SOUTH BERETANIA STREET  SUITE 406  HONOLULU, HAWAI`I 96813  TEL (808) 587-3822  Fax (808) 587-3827 EMAIL: dbedt.luc.web@hawaii.gov

Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804

DAVID Y. IGE
Governor

SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
Chairperson, Board of Agriculture

DOUGLAS S. CHIN
Lt. Governor

PHYLLIS SHIMABUKURO-GEISER
Deputy to the Chairperson
State of Hawaii
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
1428 South King Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512
Phone: (808) 973-9600 FAX: (808) 973-9613

TESTIMONY OF SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
CHAIRPERSON, BOARD OF AGRICULTURE
BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEES ON AGRICULTURE AND WATER & LAND
FEBRUARY 14, 2018
11:20 A.M.
CONFERENCE ROOM 325
HOUSE BILL NO. 2665 HD1
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Chairpersons Creagan and Yamane and Members of the Committees:

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on House Bill No. 2665 HD1 that amends
Chapter 205 to require special permit approval for solar energy facilities in excess of 15
kilowatts and placed within a single lot or multiple lots on “D” and “E” agricultural lands
within a “non-conforming residential subdivision” created prior to January 1, 1980 that
have been identified by the county. The Department of Agriculture has strong concerns
about this measure.
This measure, as written, may result in unintended adverse consequences on the
use of the special permit process and the Agricultural District. The proposed definition
of “non-conforming residential subdivision” (page 5, lines 8-14) is arbitrary with respect
to the January 1, 1980 date. Further, we believe “…a subdivision located in an
agricultural district created prior to January 1, 1980 for primarily residential purposes
which do not conform to current county codes and has been identified by each county;”
(emphasis added) is in violation of Chapter 205. Chapter 205 only permits residential
uses in the Urban and Rural Districts and prohibits them in the Agricultural District. The

Department of Agriculture requested an opinion from the Department of the Attorney
General in August 1975 and received their response, wherein the following is stated:
(Department of the Attorney General, Opinion No. 75-8, dated September 3,
1975, pages 4-5)
“If any owner of a lot located within an agricultural district uses his lot as a one- to
three-acre residential estate and not as “a farm where agricultural activity provides
income to the family occupying the dwelling” located on the lot, he would appear to be in
violation of chapter 205 and the State Land Use District Regulations.”
This bill is requesting that the special permit process be required of solar energy
facilities which is a permitted use of “D” and “E” agricultural land when solar energy
facilities are proposed for “non-conforming residential subdivisions” that we believe to
be in violation of Chapter 205. We believe the special permit process (which is
reserved for “certain unusual and reasonable uses within agricultural and rural districts
other than those for which the district is classified” (Section 205-6(a)) should not be
allowed to be used in the manner proposed in this bill to resolve a particular situation.

Thank you for the opportunity to submit our testimony.

Harry Kim

Michael Yee

Mayor

Director

Daryn Arai
Deputy Director
West Hawai‘i Office
74-5044 Ane Keohokālole Hwy
Kailua-Kona, Hawai‘i 96740
Phone (808) 323-4770
Fax (808) 327-3563

County of Hawai‘i
PLANNING DEPARTMENT

East Hawai‘i Office
101 Pauahi Street, Suite 3
Hilo, Hawai‘i 96720
Phone (808) 961-8288
Fax (808) 961-8742

February 13, 2018
Testimony by
MICHAEL YEE
Director, County of Hawai'i Planning Department
before the
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
COMMITTEE ON WATER & LAND
Wednesday, February 14, 2018, 11:20 A.M.
State Capitol, Conference Room 325
in consideration of
HB 2665, HD1
Relating to Solar Energy
We would like to express our STRONG CONCERNS regarding HB2665, which seeks to
prohibit large, industrial-scale solar facilities in subdivisions established prior to January 1, 1980
and situated on Agricultural-designated lands.
While we support the intent of this proposed legislation, its approach should be reconsidered as it
will have severe implications upon the way we currently administer both State and County land
use laws. More specifically,
1. "non-conforming subdivisions" as defined in the bill is inconsistent with a similar
definition embodied within the County of Hawai'i Zoning Code and even in State Land
Use Law where single family dwellings are permitted on agricultural lands for lots
existing before June 4, 1976 (HRS205-4.5(b))
2. We believe it is unreasonable to require a Special Permit for solar energy facilities
having a production capacity of more than 15 kilowatts when sited within a "nonconforming residential subdivision". There are tens of thousands of lots on Hawai'i
Island that may fall into this category and requiring a Special Permit, involving a public
hearing for each and every qualifying homeowner, is excessive. It will have the
consequence of punishing many innocent homeowners to prevent industrial-scale solar
energy facilities that was initially allowed by the Legislature in 2011.
3. Requiring possibly hundreds (maybe thousands) of homeowners to apply for a
Special Permit will have a severe impact upon our Planning Commissions, comprised of
volunteers, who have much more pressing matters before them than to consider a Special
Permit for a 20kw solar energy system on the roof of a single family dwelling.
www.hiplanningdept.com

Hawai`i County is an Equal Opportunity Provider and Employer

planning@hawaiicounty.gov

Testimony HB 2665
February 2, 2018
Page 2

4. Solar energy facilities on Agricultural lands were first permitted in 2011 by the
Legislature through the adoption of Act 217. Prior to this amendment to the State Land
Use Law, Special Permits were required for industrial-scale solar energy facilities and
homeowner-scale solar energy facilities were out rightly permitted as incidental and
subordinate to a single family dwelling. This process generally worked well, until Act
217 was adopted.
Please consider our concerns and thank you for the opportunity to comment.

CHRISTOPHER J. YUEN
ATTORNEY AT LAW

P.O. Box 5
Ninole, HI 96773
Telephone: (808)963-6966
e-mail: chrisyuenz@hotmail.com

Feb. 12, 2018
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO HB2665HD1
The House Water and Land and Agriculture Committees should reject HB2665HD1, an antisolar energy bill that would hurt Hawai’i’s efforts toward energy self-sufficiency. The State and
its Legislature have made many noble pronouncements and set noble goals about switching to
solar and other forms of renewable energy, such as the goal of “100%” of our electricity coming
from renewable sources by 2045. So why pass a bill that makes it harder to produce energy from
solar photovoltaic systems?
Global warming is the world’s most serious environmental problem, and we have to do our part
to cut down our use of fossil fuels. All renewable energy sources can have some negative effects,
but solar PV is probably the most benign. A PV array doesn’t make noise, cause smells, or emit
pollutants. Its visual impact is much less, and confined to a smaller area, than wind turbines. It
just sits there pumping out electricity. The impacts are very predictable and don’t require a
special permit process. Calling solar PV on a large scale “industrial” makes it sound scary but
doesn’t change the fact that it is a very low impact way of generating electricity.
Perhaps a neighbor of a solar PV array would rather see a vacant lot next door. But solar energy
is not significantly less attractive than many other uses that can be made of lots in the ag district.
For example, the lot could be covered in shade cloth structures. And why would the Legislature,
in balancing the various interests involved, change the current laws that favor the development of
solar energy? The public benefit of more solar PV greatly outweighs the perceived harm.
We will never make significant progress in producing renewable energy if the Legislature
succumbs to NIMBY-ism.
There are many solar installations of more than 15 KW on barns, commercial buildings, and
public buildings throughout the state. Typically they don’t bother anybody and in fact, most
people like them: they symbolize progress toward renewable energy.
I’m writing as an individual and not in any official capacity, but I was planning director of
Hawai’i County for eight years and I’m very familiar with the special permit process and the
problems that can arise.
A special permit can be a major hurdle. It can trigger a contested case hearing, which can take
years to resolve in the courts. In the meantime, even if the permit gets approved by the County
Planning Commission, a solar developer takes a risk if it starts construction while an appeal is
pending. The permit could be reversed on procedural grounds that have nothing to do with the
merits.

HB2665HD1 has many technical flaws. It supposedly applies to subdivisions in the agricultural
district “created prior to January 1, 1980 for primarily residential purposes.” Who determines
this, and whose intent counts? Typically, there is nothing in the official file of a subdivision that
states a purpose. The real primary purpose of most of the subdividers was to sell land at a profit.
Please help solar energy and reject this bill.

2

Ann Bosted
P. O. Box 6254, Ocean View, HI 96737
February 12, 2018
The Honorable Richard P. Creagan, Chair
The Honorable Ryan I. Yamane, Chair
The Honorable Lynn DeCoite, Vice Chair
The Honorable Chris Toda, Vice Chair
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture.
Members of the House Committee on Water and Land.
Dear Chair Yamane, Chair Creagan, Vice Chair Toda, Vice Chair DeCoite and Members:
SUBJECT: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.B. 2665 RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL SOLAR
INSTALLATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB 2665. I request you
to kindly pass this bill as it would require any future industrial-scale solar developments that are
planned for residential subdivisions, to obtain a special use permit from the County. This bill
would afford “due process” to hundreds of thousands of residents in non-conforming
subdivisions on the Big Island by allowing them to participate in the special use permit system.
One would think that a bill to stop solar developers from building a 6.5 megawatt, industrial
scale facility in a residential neighborhood would be completely unnecessary, but, sadly, this is
not so. In our town of Ocean View (population 7,000) a Chinese corporation, SPI Energy, plans
to build 26 three-acre facilities among homes in our town. They can do this because, although
we are first and foremost a residential area, “non-conforming subdivisions” are in the
Agricultural District, and solar is a permitted use on ag. land. This is a loophole in the law which
is being ruthlessly exploited to the detriment of our town. The attached map shows how
invasive this project is, and illustrates why this bill is so necessary.
My husband and I bought our four-bedroom home in Ocean View with the expectation that we
would retire here and spend our golden years taking in the spectacular views from our lanai,
enjoying the mild weather and being part of a community that, according to the census,
doubles every decade. We are now threatened with industrialization. If it goes forward, we
will have to pack up and move and sell our home at a considerable loss. We are not prepared
to live among housing lots that have been stripped of ‘ohi’a trees, bull-dozed edge to edge,
covered with industrial components, and surrounded by an eight-foot fence adorned with
signage reading “DANGER - KEEP OUT - HIGH VOLTAGE”. I respectfully ask if you, or your
family, could live in that kind of environment? If not, you now know why this bill needs to be
passed.

Large solar projects are ideal for large tracts of bone fide agricultural land, not housing lots.
Recent lava flows afford huge areas of treeless, unproductive lava land that are ideal for
ground-mounted solar arrays. Some tracts of empty land are owned by struggling farmers who
need income, while others are owned by Hawaiian organizations like Kamehameha Schools,
which could use the income for the public good. About 50% of the land on the Big Island is in
the Agricultural District. Perhaps you can agree that our future energy needs should be located
on poor agricultural land where farmers and land owners can benefit?
This bill is not anti-solar. The Big Island currently has a surplus of daytime energy - the primary
reason for ending the popular Net Energy Metering program. We need a cheap source of
evening energy - ideally from a large, contiguous solar farm that also has large, cost-effective
batteries to store the energy for night-time use. Small projects on three acre sites - while large
enough to ruin the ambiance in a residential area - are quite unsuitable for batteries, which are
installed “behind the meter”. Since each site has its own meter, each site would need a small,
expensive, less-efficient battery that would drive up the cost of power.
This bill is pro-residential. It is very fair. If a restaurant or a Bed-and-Breakfast or a similar
business is required to get a special use permit from the County before operating in nonconforming subdivisions, why not an industrial scale solar facility? We need more affordable
housing and non-conforming subdivisions are an excellent resource of affordable land.
The limit of 15 kW is very fair. Our household has a three-kilowatt roof-top solar system, and it
never fails to exceed our needs - the surplus goes into the grid. It is highly unlikely that
households or businesses would need a PV system with a name plate capacity of more than
15kW. However, in that unlikely event, the owner can apply for a permit. The permit process
gives residents “due process” or fair treatment through the normal judicial system, to which
every citizen is entitled. As the law stands now, residents of non-conforming subdivisions do
not have the “due process” afforded to those in the urban, rural and conservation districts.
This bill will not stop SPI Energy’s project - we have a formal complaint before the Public
Utilities Commission, and the management of the project will be fully investigated in docket
2016-0224. The PUC has the power to stop the project, and we have every expectation that the
Commission will put the interests of the public first and stop the boondoggle project.
I respectfully and earnestly entreat you to kindly act in the interests of all the hundreds of
thousands of residents of non-conforming subdivisions on the Island of Hawai’i, and pass this
bill to save our rural communities.
Yours truly,
s// Ann Bosted

Robert C. Werner
Susan J Werner

February 13, 2018

The Honorable Richard P. Creagan, Chair
The Honorable Ryan I. Yamane, Chair
The Honorable Lynn DeCoite, Vice Chair
The Honorable Chris Toda, Vice Chair
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture.
Members of the House Committee on Water and Land.
Dear Chair Yamane, Chair Creagan, Vice Chair Toda, Vice Chair DeCoite and Members:
SUBJECT: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.B. 2665 RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL SOLAR
INSTALLATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB 2665. I respectfully
request you to pass this bill that would require any future large scale solar developments
planned for residential subdivisions, to obtain a special use permit from the County.
The original intent of the legislation allowing large scale solar developments in agricultural
areas was to foster the development of alternative energy resources for our communities.
Unfortunately, it failed to take into account the existence of nonconforming subdivisions;
residential communities on small acreage but zoned as agricultural. While large scale solar
projects might have, at the time, been appropriate for large agricultural tracts of limited utility,
It is certainly not appropriate for residential communities. In addition, since the inception of
the aforementioned legislation, the demand for additional alternative energy developments
has seriously diminished. Surely the construction of large scale solar installations in residential
areas benefits no one.
I urge you to pass HB 2665 and provide an opportunity for the counties to determine the value
and appropriateness of any large scale solar development planned for a residential area.
Thank you for taking the time to listen to our concerns.
Sincerely
Bob Werner
Sue Werner

PO Box 6338
Ocean View, HI 96737
February 13, 2018

The Honorable Richard P. Creagan, Chair
The Honorable Ryan I. Yamane, Chair
The Honorable Lynn DeCoite, Vice Chair
The Honorable Chris Toda, Vice Chair
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture
Members of the House Committee on Water and Land

SUBJECT: Testimony in support of H>B> 2665 relating to Industrial Solar installations in residential
subdivisions.
Thank you for this opportunity to submit my testimony that supports HB 2665. This bill is extremely
important to prevent inappropriate development of industrial-scale industrial solar developments in
residential subdivisions without obtaining a special use permit from the County.
As a resident and business owner in Hawaiian Ranchos, I am currently faced with the potential threat of a
portion of a widespread industrial-scale solar installation directly in front of my house! Our rural home set
in a lovely Ohia forest on 3 acres of Agricultural Residential will be forever ruined by the improper
positioning of such an entity there. I submit the following issues that have not been considered previously
in allowing this to occur:
Public Health and Safety: Fires that could well occur would not be able to be fought by Ocean View
Firefighters because they have not been trained to fight the kind of fires that high-voltage installations
would start. There is no county water and therefor are no fire hydrants, either. This particular subdivision
is in the direct path of strong trade winds and such a fire could rapidly spread to homes both above
ground and underground through lava tunnels.
Widespread Community Opposition: Over 850 people in Hawaiian Ranchos Subdivision signed a
petition against solar industrialization there and 90 plus letters were sent to the PUC expressing opposition
to a transmission line that is required by the current Ocean View ProjectAs a board member of Hawaiian
Ranchos Community Association, I was there when it polled it’s members twice regarding the project with
overwhelming opposition both times.
. In addition, the following community meetings were held with almost unanimous opposition.
June 2015 – HELCO and SPI announced the project with the response of outrage and even with
threats of disrupting the project.
July 2015 – A public meeting with State Representative Richard Creagan and County Council
representative Maile David where residents confirmed adamant opposition to the project.

PO Box 6338
Ocean View, HI 96737

February 2016 – PUC Public Hearing with PUC Chairman Randy Iwase where residents from
several local subdivisions voiced opposition to the transmission line proposal and the project. Mr. Iwase
was notably impressed with the public’s concern and said that the justifiable complaints had not “fallen on
deaf ears”.
April 2017 – Public meeting with SPI ambassador Kevin White where the overwhelming public
request was for relocation.
Lawlessness: That could be made worse by those who could vandalize installations for equipment and
panels, etc,
The freefall of property values: That did occur as a result of the approved distribution of these installations
throughout the subdivision.
These are but a few of the problems facing these communities but I hope these illustrate enough for your
consideration.
In closing, please know that I am not anti-solar. I am simply pro-residential and pro-agriculture. I simply
recognize the need and indeed fairness that industrial solar entities should be required to adhere to the
same rules as other businesses like Bed and Breakfasts, Commercial Kitchens, Water Hauling
Companies, Real Estate Companies and Restaurants, etc as regarding special use permits.
This bill is fair, no cost to the state and protects residents of non-conforming subdivisions (mostly in
agricultural areas) the same protections they would receive if located in a Rural District. No one chooses
to reside in country communities to live next door or opposite to three acres of eight foot chain link fence,
with ugly signage “Danger high voltage keep out” where beautiful O’hia trees once resided!
Thank you, once again, for considering and hopefully approving this very important bill to avoid future
frustration for Non-conforming Subdivision residents.
Respectively submitted,

Linda Raquinio

Robert C. Werner
Susan J Werner

February 13, 2018

The Honorable Richard P. Creagan, Chair
The Honorable Ryan I. Yamane, Chair
The Honorable Lynn DeCoite, Vice Chair
The Honorable Chris Toda, Vice Chair
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture.
Members of the House Committee on Water and Land.
Dear Chair Yamane, Chair Creagan, Vice Chair Toda, Vice Chair DeCoite and Members:
SUBJECT: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.B. 2665 RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL SOLAR
INSTALLATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB 2665. I respectfully
request you to pass this bill that would require any future large scale solar developments
planned for residential subdivisions, to obtain a special use permit from the County.
The original intent of the legislation allowing large scale solar developments in agricultural
areas was to foster the development of alternative energy resources for our communities.
Unfortunately, it failed to take into account the existence of nonconforming subdivisions;
residential communities on small acreage but zoned as agricultural. While large scale solar
projects might have, at the time, been appropriate for large agricultural tracts of limited utility,
It is certainly not appropriate for residential communities. In addition, since the inception of
the aforementioned legislation, the demand for additional alternative energy developments
has seriously diminished. Surely the construction of large scale solar installations in residential
areas benefits no one.
I urge you to pass HB 2665 and provide an opportunity for the counties to determine the value
and appropriateness of any large scale solar development planned for a residential area.
Thank you for taking the time to listen to our concerns.
Sincerely
Bob Werner
Sue Werner

February 13, 2018

The Honorable Richard P. Creagan, Chair
The Honorable Ryan I. Yamane, Chair
The Honorable Lynn DeCoite, Vice Chair
The Honorable Chris Toda, Vice Chair
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture.
Members of the House Committee on Water and Land.
Dear Chair Yamane, Chair Creagan, Vice Chair Toda, Vice Chair DeCoite and Members:
SUBJECT: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.B. 2665 RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL SOLAR
INSTALLATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB 2665. I very
respectfully request you to pass this common sense bill that would require any future
industrial-scale solar developments planned for residential subdivisions, to obtain a special use
permit from the County.
The fact that a company has established permits of this kind on a property bordering mine
caused me to leave my property (as I had a new baby and was worried about construction and
a solar installation being installed 40 feet from where we slept) and also leave a very
prosperous business in the local community, that added jobs and revenue and was a positive
contribution to a small rural town. I have retained ownership in the property but am afraid to
put further investments in it and consider living on my land (I now rent elsewhere) due to the
issue of a large solar installation project having the ability to build besides a place (like mine)
that has residential living permits in place. This doesn’t make sense and has directly affected
where I live, my livelihood, my life choices, and my financial life. To allow speculators and
foreign investors to take advantage of loopholes in the current law does not support a good
local economy, and every individual’s right to peacefully enjoy their property without undue
duress or harassment (in this situation, by a large solar field being installed right next door). I
strongly urge you to pass this bill preventing future catastrophe’s like this happening to normal
people trying to enjoy their home and property. Being a graduate student now in sustainability
and environment law, it is obvious and research is clear that installations of this type are not
meant for residential areas where people live, or in the middle of towns, agricultural or not. I
fully support solar installations, but of course there are electrical, health, environmental, and
other issues with their installation. Thus, care should be taken for them to be installed
accordingly. I will happily provide research that some types of solar cells also contain dangerous

metals, not meant to be near living residences. Additionally, the high frequency voltage lines
and sounds from these installations have known adverse effects to human health and living
conditions. In no way is it acceptable for them to be installed in communities with houses. As in
other jurisdictions around the world, they are responsibly only places in areas with no
immediate communities or human habitation. Hawaii should pass this bill to ensure our
communities are not taken advantage of by speculators, or outside investors seeking loopholes
in state laws.
Sincerely,
Anitra Pickett
Property Owner Hawaii Ocean View Ranchos, Ocean View, HI 96737
Owner Lova Lava Land Eco-Resort LLC
ASU School of Sustainability and Sandra Day O’Conner School of Law Graduate Student
MBA Hawaii Pacific University

HB-2665-HD-1
Submitted on: 2/13/2018 10:01:03 PM
Testimony for AGR on 2/14/2018 11:20:00 AM
Submitted By

Organization

Diane Ware

Individual

Testifier
Position
Support

Present at
Hearing
No

Comments:
Dear Committee Members,

I strongly support this bill to require county permits and public input before allowing
industrial solar in residential AG subdivisions.
Mahalo nui,
Diane WARE
99-7815 Kapoha
Volcano HI 96785

Greta Pickett (Owner of land in Hawaii)
271 Hwy 332
Pelham, Al. 35124

02/14/2018

The Honorable Richard P. Creagan, Chair
The Honorable Ryan I. Yamane, Chair
The Honorable Lynn DeCoite, Vice Chair
The Honorable Chris Toda, Vice Chair
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture.
Members of the House Committee on Water and Land.
Dear Chair Yamane, Chair Creagan, Vice Chair Toda, Vice Chair DeCoite and Members:
SUBJECT: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.B. 2665 RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL SOLAR
INSTALLATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB 2665. I very
respectfully request you to pass this common sense bill that would require any future
industrial-scale solar developments planned for residential subdivisions, to obtain a special use
permit from the County.
People buy into a residential subdivision expecting it to remain residential. In my opinion it is
totally wrong for any company to come into a subdivision to build solar installations, unless
everyone in the subdivision agrees to it.

