SPE600-16-R-0809                                                                      Page 1 of 3
US Army Garrison - Hawaii



                               Past Performance Questionnaire
                               (Solicitation No. SPE600-16-R-0809)

NOTE TO RECIPIENT:

        a) Per FAR 15.306(e)(4), the Government will not reveal the names of individuals providing
        reference information about an offeror’s past performance.

        b) Please submit this completed questionnaire directly to the following DLA Energy
        Contracting Officer by close of business July 28, 2016:

                                Robert Hughes
                                Contracting Officer
                                Defense Logistics Agency (Lorton)
                                DLA Energy – FEEAB (Utility Services Division)
                                8725 John J. Kingman Road, STP 10400
                                Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6222
                                Tel: (703) 617-1509
                                E-mail: robert.hughes@dla.mil

  NOTE TO OFFEROR: Complete Blocks 1 through 14 prior to providing to reference.
1) Owner/Customer/Agency/Installation         2) Point of Contact     3) Telephone             4) E Mail
Name


5) Mailing Address                                  6) Customer/Agency/Installation DLA Energy




7) Offeror / Contractor Name                  8) Contract/Account        9) Value           10) Award Date
                                                    Number


11) Mailing Address                          12) Contract/Account   13) Performance          14) Completion
                                                     Type           Period                        Date




Services Provided (see JA39 Attachment):
SPE600-16-R-0809                                                                                               Page 2 of 3
US Army Garrison - Hawaii

                            Questionnaire Instructions to Recipient
In order for the Government to review and assess the contractor’s past performance rating, please
use the following ratings to describe the offeror’s performance on your contract/account or
project.

Choose the rating that most accurately describes the contractor’s performance or situation.
Use the following descriptions as guidance in providing ratings. For each question, please place
an “X” in the box corresponding to the rating. Please provide narrative explanations for any
ratings of “Substantial Confidence” or “No Confidence.” Indicate non-applicable items as
N/A.
The narrative explanations need not be lengthy, just detailed, clear and concise and provided at
the end of the questionnaire. Guidelines for Ratings are provided in the table below:

Guidelines for Ratings
Sub C     Substantial Confidence            Performance met or exceeded all contract/service requirements. Problems were
                                            minimized and were negligible and resolved by the Contractor in a timely, highly
                                            effective manner.
Sat C     Satisfactory Confidence           Performance met contract/service requirements. There were problems and corrective
                                            actions taken by the Contractor were acceptable.
LC        Limited Confidence                Performance met contract/service requirements. There were problems and corrective
                                            actions taken by the Contractor were ineffective at times.
NC        No Confidence                     Performance did not meet all contract/service requirements. There were problems
                                            and corrective actions taken by the Contractor were ineffective.


If more space is required, use the back of the questionnaire or attach additional pages. Ratings
should only reflect the performance of the contractor in question.

Question Categories
1. Management Effectiveness:                                                     Sub C      Sat C     LC     NC     N/A
a. Contractor provided competent program/project manager and
supervisors (overall performance of the management team)
b. Contractor effectively managed equipment and people per Statement of
Work and protected any leased or other property provided through the
contract (i.e., buildings, etc.)
c. Contractor managed documentation (i.e., planning documents, reports,
instructions, policies, training, licensing, certificates, etc.)

2. Quality:                                                                      Sub C      Sat C     LC     NC     N/A
a. Contractor provided effective quality control and/or inspection
procedures resulting in acceptable service (i.e., few failed inspections)
b. Contractor’s quality control system established adequate procedures to
find and correct performance discrepancies
c. Contractor adhered to the quality control plan and worked closely with
your company’s/agency’s quality control personnel

3. Timeliness/Adherence to Schedules:                                            Sub C      Sat C     LC     NC     N/A
a. Contractor managed scheduling and met established project deadlines to
complete the project on time (i.e., reports due, meeting attendance, delivery
of service, etc.)
SPE600-16-R-0809                                                                                      Page 3 of 3
US Army Garrison - Hawaii

b. Contractor identified problems and responded to emergency/surge
requirements in a timely manner (i.e., avoiding unnecessary schedule
delays)
c. Contractor submitted the progress schedule and progress reports as
required

4. Sub Contracts and Management:                                                Sub C   Sat C   LC   NC   N/A
a. Contractor provided experienced/qualified managers and supervisors with
the
technical and administrative abilities needed to meet contract requirements
b. Contractor hired quality subcontractors and effectively managed and
coordinated their work
c. Contractor ensured the project manager had sufficient authority to make
decisions and take actions during project performance to keep the project on
schedule
d. Contractor complied with applicable Labor Laws, responding
appropriately to all safety authorities and immediately correcting any
deficiencies or areas of concern

5. Change/Cost Control:                                                         Sub C   Sat C   LC   NC   N/A
a. Contractor responsive to contract changes and provided accurate,
reasonable and supportable cost proposals
b. Contractor demonstrated the ability to control costs and/or design
projects or modifications within the magnitude specified

6. Customer Satisfaction:                                                       Sub C   Sat C   LC   NC   N/A
a. Contractor maintained a professional working relationship and was
flexible in responding to customer requirements
b. Program/project manager had the authority to carry out the day-to-day
operations of the contract/project
c. Contractor was reasonable and cooperative in resolving customer complaints
d. The overall rating the contractor would be given for this project

Would your organization award another contract to this contractor? (Circle one)
YES or NO

Please provide a brief referenced narrative explanation for ratings of “Exceptional” or
“Unacceptable”, and reference the specific question.

Question No.:        Narrative:
