                      DLA Energy Utility Services
               Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan
                                        (QASP)
                                      Template
(NOTE: In the final QASP document, delete the word “Template” above, and replace with
contract number and description using the following format:

                             Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX

                         (Installation Name) – (Name of System(s))

                         System Owner: (Name of System Owner)

Do not include this note as part of the QASP document.)




                                       17 May 2013



                                        Version 1.0
                  Defense Logistics Agency Energy, Utility Services Division,

                                  Internal Support Branch
                                              1
                                  UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                          (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


       TABLE OF CONTENTS
  I.    Introduction

           a. Purpose

           b. Government Roles and Responsibilities

           c. System Owner (SO) Roles and Responsibilities

           d. General Areas to be Monitored During SO Performance

           e. Performance Standards

           f. Surveillance/Monitoring Methods

           g. Performance-Based Rating System to be Used

           h. Performance Documentation

 II.    Specific Plans/Areas to Be Monitored Under the QASP

           a. Operational Transition Plan (NOTE: Remove link and insert “(removed)” after
              the word “Plan” after successful completion of the Operational Transition
              Plan…Do not include this note as part of the QASP document.)

           b. Service Interruption Contingency and Catastrophic Loss Plan

           c. Operations and Maintenance/Quality Management Plan

           d. Initial System Deficiency Corrections/Renewals & Replacements Plan

           e. Other Areas to be Monitored

III.    General Methodology Used in Building and Maintaining the Plan-Specific
        Checklists (Appendices D through H) in the QASP

IV.     QASP Maintenance/Review/Update

 V.     Summary
                                                 2
                            UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                    (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


Appendices

  Appendix A – FORM – QASP Periodic Maintenance, Review & Acceptance

  Appendix B – FORM – Performance Report

  Appendix C – FORM – Contract Discrepancy Report (CDR) (DD Form 2772)

  Appendix D – FORM – COR Monthly Report to the Contracting Officer

  Appendix E – CHECKLIST – Operational Transition Plan (NOTE: Upon successful
  completion of the Operational Transition Period, remove Appendix E links (including
  table below), and insert the text: “(removed)” after the word “Plan”…Do not include
  this note as part of the QASP document.)

       1. Initial Contract Documentation /       7. Joint Inventory
          Requirements

       2. Conduct Post-Award Orientation         8. Service Requirements
          Conference

       3. Permits and Leases/Easements           9. Records Management

       4. Security Requirements                  10. Environmental Compliance

       5. Budget / IT Requirements               11. Contingency Operations

       6. SO Personnel Policies



  Appendix F – CHECKLIST – Service Interruption Contingency and Catastrophic Loss
  Plan

  Appendix G – CHECKLIST – Operations and Maintenance/Quality Management Plan

       1. Meetings                               4. Data Transfer

       2. Plans and Operation Initiatives        5. Environmental Compliance

       3. System Deficiency Corrections /
          Renewals / Replacements



                                             3
                          UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                  (Installation Name, State) (system(s))




Appendix H – CHECKLIST – Initial System Deficiency Corrections / Renewals and
Replacements Plan

     1. Project Review / Master Planning       3. Post-Project Completion Actions

     2. Specific Project Planning



Appendix I – CHECKLIST – Other Areas to be Monitored




                                           4
                            UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                    (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


I.   Introduction
        a. Purpose:

           1) This Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan (QASP) is an instructional/guidance
              document that will assist the Utility Services (US) Contracting Officer’s
              Representative (COR) in technical observation and contract management
              duties on this US contract. The QASP also serves as an official document
              informing the System Owner (SO) of those areas of technical observation and
              contract management for which the COR will be involved. The QASP uses a
              combination of surveillance methods to adequately asses the technical and
              management requirements of this contract. This QASP is an attachment to the
              US contract. However, it is important to note that this QASP is living
              document that may change as needed or when the current contract is amended
              or if changes are needed outside the normal scope of the contract directives.

        b. Government Roles and Responsibilities:

           1) Contracting Officer (KO): Has overall responsibility for overseeing the
              SO’s performance. The KO, through an assigned COR, monitors the SO’s
              performance in the areas of contract compliance, contract administration, and
              cost control. The KO also reviews the quality of the COR’s assessment of the
              SO’s performance, to include resolving any differences between the COR’s
              and the SO’s version of events. The KO is the only individual authorized to
              direct the SO in the performance of his duties under the contract and to make
              interpretations of, and changes to, the contract that bind the Government. No
              payments will be made for any unauthorized supplies/services or for any
              unauthorized changes to the work specified herein. This includes any services
              performed by the SO of its own volition or at the request of an individual
              other than the duly appointed Contracting Officer. It is very important to
              remember that the Contracting Officer is the ONLY person that may obligate
              US Government for any changes to the contract.

           2) Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR): Has the responsibility for
              technical monitoring of the SO’s performance, as well as assessing, recording,
              and reporting on the SO’s compliance with the terms and conditions of the
              contract. The COR will ensure his/her availability to receive mandatory
              training prior to performing SO surveillance. The COR will maintain
              surveillance documentation and will notify the Installation Commander
              (through the KO) of any significant Performance deficiencies, and recommend
                                           5
                     UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                             (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


      improvements to the QASP and Performance Work Statement (PWS)
      throughout the life of the contract. The COR is appointed to represent the
      Contracting Officer on technical matters and has no authority to bind the
      government or direct performance not otherwise authorized and stipulated in
      this contract. This individual has primary responsibility for accepting,
      rejecting, or requiring correction of any deficiencies found in deliverables
      unless otherwise defined in this task order. In the event of rejection of any
      deliverable, the SO will be notified in writing by the Contracting Officer of
      the specific reasons why the deliverable was rejected.

   3) Other Key Government Personnel: Contracting Specialist(s), US COR
      Program Manager and the US Contracting Team will provide contractual
      guidance and requirements when needed or appropriate. Any unforeseen or
      potential conflicts or problems can be addressed with the individuals listed but
      for any contractual changes, the Contracting Officer is the ONLY authority to
      make any change to the contract. If applicable, this QASP will be revised to
      include relevant POC information.

c. System Owner (SO) Roles and Responsibilities:

   1) The SO has the responsibility for complying fully with the terms and
      conditions of the contract, participating as a member of the multi-functional
      team in the post-award management phase, maintaining and implementing a
      Quality Control Plan that complements the Performance Plan insuring that
      non-conforming contract services are identified and corrected. The SO will
      perform for the Government services that conform to the contract
      requirements and recommend changes to the contract that will provide more
      effective operations or eliminate unnecessary costs. The SO will be
      responsible for the execution of both the contractual and technical aspects of
      the contract performance. As the owner of the (insert type(s)) utility
      system(s), and performing under a utility services contract to the Government,
      the SO is responsible for all ownership, operations, maintenance,
      renewals/replacements/system deficiency corrections, and applicable
      compliance issues related to the system(s).

d. General Areas to be Monitored During SO Performance:

   1) Quality of Services Provided


                                     6
                                 UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                         (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


                         i.   Compliance with Contract Requirements
                        ii.   Appropriateness of Personnel for the Task
                       iii.   Technical Excellence

              2) Timeliness of Performance / Adherence to Schedule

                         i.   Responsiveness to Technical Direction
                        ii.   Completion of Work Requirements
                       iii.   Reliability

              3) Cost Control

                         i.   Demonstration of Daily Operational Efficiencies
                        ii.   Execution of Scoped Renewal/Replacement/Upgrade Work
                       iii.   Incorporation of Value-based Engineering Concepts
                       iv.    Plan/Approach for Review of Contract Financial Status
                        v.    Anticipation of Unquantified (yet reasonably expected) Utility-
                              Related Issues
                       vi.    Accuracy & Clarity of Billings

              4) Business Relations

                         i.   Management Effectiveness
                        ii.   Flexibility
                       iii.   Customer-focus
                       iv.    Avoidance of Problems
                        v.    Timeliness of Notification and Mitigation of Problems
                              o    Effectiveness of SO’s Recommended Solutions
                              o    Effectiveness of Execution of Problem Resolution

              5) Management of Key Personnel

                         i.   Staffing Stability -- Levels and Key Personnel
                        ii.   Qualifications & Relevant Experience of Personnel


(Note: The five general areas in I.d above may serve to provide helpful structure/direction to
the COR when submitting input for the annual SO Performance Assessment and Rating
System (CPARS) assessment required for the contract. Although the above represent major
areas to be considered when monitoring SO performance, the list should not necessarily be
considered all inclusive…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)
                                                7
                                 UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                         (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


Section II of this QASP provides further technical guidance and lists the specific operational
plans associated with this Utility Services contract.

           e. Performance Standards

               1) The Description/Specifications/Work Statement identifies Government
                  objectives and performance standards. The Government will use these
                  standards to assess SO performance against these objectives to ensure
                  performance is, at a minimum, satisfactory.

           f. Surveillance/Monitoring Methods

               1) Various methods exist to monitor performance. Below are examples of
                  surveillance/monitoring methods the COR will use in the administration of
                  this QASP. Regardless of the surveillance method, the COR will contact the
                  SO’s designated representative when a problem/defect is identified and
                  provide the representative the details of the identified problem/defect.
                  Examples of surveillance/monitoring methods include:

                         i.   Direct Observation (e.g. real-time observation of utility system
                              activities or meetings being performed by the SO)
                        ii.   Assessment of Deliverables (e.g. verification of the timeliness and
                              quality/sufficiency of required submittals, such as monthly outage
                              reports and the Annual Corrections/Upgrades/ Connections/R&R
                              Plan)
                       iii.   Review of Invoices/Payments (e.g. verification of the accuracy of
                              submitted invoices and payment receipts for all billable costs, to
                              include travel and miscellaneous expenses)
                        iv.   Sample Reviews (e.g. review of operation & maintenance
                              procedures/plans at an unspecified/unannounced frequency)

                      The Inspection and Acceptance clauses (or other applicable clauses)
                      become the basis for any actions that the Contracting Officer may deem
                      appropriate when performance requirements are not being met or the
                      quality is of an unsatisfactory level.

           g. Performance-Based Rating System to be Used



                                                8
                 UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                         (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


1) The SO will be annually assessed and rated for their performance and
   operation of the utility system listed per the contract. The Contractor
   Performance Assessment Reporting System (CPARS) will be utilized to
   perform this assessment:

         i.   CPARS training can be accessed at: http://www.cpars.csd.disa.mil/
              (Use “Assessing Official Representative” role) (Approx. 2 hrs. to
              complete)

   The COR will establish an account in CPARS in order to officially contribute
   to the Government’s annual assessment of the SO’s performance. The COR’s
   input will carry significant weight in the development of the Government’s
   overall annual rating of the SO’s performance under this contract. The COR
   will assign a rating to the SO’s performance under the contract using the
   following table:


EXCEPTIONAL            Performance exceeded many of the contract requirements to
                        the Government’s benefit.
                       Few minor problems resulted from the performance; any
                        corrective actions taken were highly effective.
VERY GOOD              Performance exceeded some of the contract requirements to
                        the Government’s benefit.
                       Some minor problems resulted from the performance; any
                        corrective actions taken were effective.
SATISFACTORY           Performance met all of the contract requirements.
                       Some minor problems resulted from the performance;
                        corrective actions taken were satisfactory.
MARGINAL               Performance did not meet some of the contract requirements,
                        causing impact to the Government.
                       Serious problems resulted from the performance, but recovery
                        was still possible; corrective actions taken were either
                        marginally effective or not fully implemented.
UNSATISFACTORY         Performance did not meet most of the contract requirements,
                        causing impact to the Government.
                       Serious problems resulted from the performance, and recovery
                                9
                     UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                             (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


                             was not considered likely; corrective actions taken were
                             ineffective.


      The COR’s assessment and recommended rating will be reviewed by the DLA
      Energy Contract Specialist and Contracting Officer to ensure sufficient
      justification.


   2) Upon completion of the Government’s annual assessment and rating of the
      SO’s performance, the assessment and rating will be officially recorded in the
      Past Performance Retrieval System (PPIRS). Information in PPIRS will serve
      as a valuable Government source of SO past performance information for
      future solicitations upon which the SO may offer.

             i.   PPIRS training can be accessed at:
                  http://www.ppirs.gov/webtrain/webtrain.htm

h. Performance Documentation

   1) SO performance on this contract will be documented in the manner described
      below:

            ii.   Acceptable performance. The Government will document
                  performance that meets or exceeds minimum task order
                  expectations. A Performance Report will be used for this
                  documentation effort, and is to be used whenever the COR
                  performs monitoring/surveillance (i.e. inspections, visits, etc.) on
                  the UP contract. A template for this Report can be found at
                  Appendix B. All Performance Report documentation will be
                  placed in the COR file. It is important to note that these
                  Performance Reports can become part of supporting
                  documentation for appropriate actions taken under this contract.

           iii.   Unacceptable performance. When unacceptable performance is
                  observed, in addition to completing a Performance Report, the
                  COR will complete a DD Form 2772, Contract Discrepancy
                  Report (CDR). An example of this form can be found at Appendix
                  C. This form serves as the official written notification to the SO of
                                    10
          UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                  (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


      an observed contract discrepancy. (Note: Only under unique
      circumstances will verbal communication be used to initially
      inform the SO of a potential contract discrepancy. However, in
      those cases, the COR will follow-up with written notification of the
      finding as soon as possible, coordinate it through the KO, and
      provide to the SO.) As part of the CDR process:

      o    The SO shall acknowledge receipt of the CDR in writing.
      o    The SO will prepare a corrective action plan to document
           how the SO shall correct the unacceptable performance and
           avoid recurrence.
      o    The CDR will clearly indicate a due date by which the SO
           has to present this corrective action plan to the COR.
      o    The Government will review the SO’s corrective action plan
           to determine acceptability.

iv.   Summary of Methodology & Purpose for Performance
      Documentation. The reports & forms referenced in this QASP are
      designed to collectively serve as a traceable documented history of
      SO performance. These will also support recordkeeping
      requirements mandated by the DoD Contracting Officer’s
      Representative Training (CORT) tool, as well as annual
      performance assessments mandated by CPARS. Specifically:
      o     Performance Report (Appendix B) -- Used by the COR
            whenever performing contract monitoring/surveillance on the
            UP contract. Both negative and positive aspects of the SO’s
            performance are documented. The information recorded in
            Performance Reports can serve as a significant source of
            documented SO performance. This information can
            subsequently be used in developing the COR Monthly Report
            to the Contracting Officer.
      o     DD Form 2772, Contract Discrepancy Report (CDR)
            (Appendix C) -- Used by the COR whenever a contract
            discrepancy is found as a result of the COR’s
            monitoring/surveillance activity. CDRs can serves as a
            significant source of documented deficient SO performance.
            Subsequently, CDRs can become part of supporting

                       11
                                UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                        (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


                                  documentation for appropriate Government actions taken
                                  under this contract regarding SO performance or failure to
                                  perform. CDRs, together with Performance Reports, should
                                  be used in developing the COR Monthly Report to the
                                  Contracting Officer.
                            o     COR Monthly Report to the Contracting Officer
                                  (Appendix D) – Required to be produced by the COR and
                                  loaded onto the DoD CORT Tool every month. Report
                                  should serve as a compilation/summary of the results &
                                  observations from the CORs contract monitoring and
                                  surveillance activities from the past month. Both negative
                                  and positive aspects of the SO’s performance are
                                  documented. The compilation of these monthly reports over
                                  the course of annual contract period of performance will
                                  serve as a significant source of documentation supporting the
                                  Government’s annual CPARS assessment for the SO under
                                  this contract.

II.   Specific Plans/Areas to Be Monitored Under the QASP

      The QASP layout is generally structured to be consistent with the major plans that
      comprise the majority of the SO’s tasks/responsibilities under this contract.

         a. Operational Transition Plan

             1) Purpose: This Plan contains the SO’s approach and procedures demonstrating
                its ability to adequately and effectively maintain continuous utility service and
                minimize service impacts, while smoothly and effectively transferring
                responsibility and accountability for utility system capital assets, permits,
                personnel resources, administration, and other system responsibilities.

             2) COR checklist for this Plan can be found at Appendix E.


         b. Service Interruption Contingency and Catastrophic Loss Plan

             1) Purpose: This Plan contains the SO’s approach and procedures demonstrating
                its ability (during normal daily operations and during disaster/contingency
                situations) to receive service requests; to classify their severity; to
                                              12
                     UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                             (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


      appropriately respond to those requests; to provide status to the customer; and
      to access proper manning, materials, equipment, and vehicles.

   2) COR checklist for this Plan can be found at Appendix F.


c. Operations and Maintenance/Quality Management Plan

   1) Purpose: This Plan contains the SO’s approach and procedures demonstrating
      its overall quality philosophy and the adequacy of procedures used to ensure
      that contract requirements are met (or exceeded) and that the system is being
      operated and maintained in a manner consistent with its long-term ability to
      provide reliable, cost-effective, and compliant service. The Plan also
      demonstrates the SO’s ability to modify service practices and quality
      management actions as necessary to accommodate changes in legal
      requirements or industry standards.

   2) COR checklist for this Plan can be found at Appendix G.


d. Initial System Deficiency Corrections/Renewals and Replacements Plan

   1) Purpose: This Plan contains the SO’s approach and procedures demonstrating
      the SO’s ability to identify, plan and execute upgrade, renewal, and
      replacement activities to ensure a long-term efficient utility system. The Plan
      should demonstrate the comprehensiveness, feasibility, and effectiveness to
      which these activities are executed.

   2) COR checklist for this Plan can be found at Appendix H.


e. Other Areas to be Monitored

   1) In addition to the four major plans above, the QASP will also include
      applicable areas of responsibility/duties for which the COR – serving as the
      Contracting Officer’s on-ground representative – should have oversight.
      These may include, but not be limited to, general activities such as 1) ensuring
      the appropriate information exchange occurs between the SO and appropriate
      Government representatives on contract/project-related issues, and 2)
      validating payment invoices submitted by the SO.

                                   13
                                UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                        (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


              2) COR checklist for this Plan can be found at Appendix I.


III.   General Methodology Used in Building and Maintaining the Plan-Specific
       Checklists (Appendices D through H) in the QASP

       (NOTE: As part of the final QASP document, it is beneficial to have a general
       discussion as to the methodology used in building its content. However, the text below
       will require modification prior to inclusion in the final QASP document used for a
       specific contract. Items a through d below, as currently shown, serves as a basis of
       instruction to aid the COR to initially construct the QASP document, as well as
       maintain thereafter…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)

       A deliberate methodology is used to develop and maintain the content of the QASP. At
       any particular time, the QASP content should reflect the most current and representative
       areas that require government monitoring, surveillance, and/or coordination to ensure
       acceptable SO performance.

          a. Review Section L of the RFP

              1) This will provide an outline of the major areas to be included in each of the
                 four main Plan-specific checklists (Appendices E though H). (Note: This will
                 help build the initial structure of the checklists to be used in the template.
                 Going forward, after the initial QASP is built, the COR should not have to
                 refer to the RFP for structural guidance on maintaining the contract-
                 specific QASP…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)

              2) Include those identified items in the appropriate Plan checklist(s).

          b. Review Section C of the RFP

              1) This will help identify potential surveillance/monitoring/coordination
                 activities to be included in any one of the five QASP checklists, as applicable
                 (Appendices E through I). (Note: These “Section C” requirements become
                 part of the actual contract upon award.)

              2) Include those identified items in the appropriate Plan checklist(s).

          c. Review the Utility-Specific Section JA Attachment

                                               14
                                UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                        (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


             1) This will help identify potential Installation-specific surveillance/monitoring/
                coordination activities to be included in any one of the five QASP checklists,
                as applicable (Appendices E through I) (Note: These “Section J”
                requirements become part of the actual contract upon award.)

             2) Include those identified items in the appropriate Plan checklist(s).

         d. Review each of the four main Plans provided by the SO and included in the
            contract

             1) Review each of the Plans (using the general initial structure provided by
                Section L of the RFP – see Section III a. above) and identify any specific
                items that address products/activities/etc. required of the SO.

             2) Include those identified items in the appropriate Plan checklist(s).

IV.   QASP Maintenance/Review/Update

      The QASP is a living document that will require periodic review and updating.

         a. Revisions to this document may be necessary to adequately reflect associated
            changes in the contract. The Contracting Officer/Specialist and/or COR will
            bring to proper attention any potential QASP revisions necessary as a result of
            any changes in the contract.

         b. As a standard, the QASP will be reviewed by the Contracting Officer at least
            annually. However, an out-of-cycle review may be accomplished if necessary or
            requested. A sample of a QASP Periodic Maintenance Review and Acceptance
            form can be found at Appendix A.

V.    Summary

      The QASP serves as an important guiding document, providing the framework for
      government monitoring, surveillance, and coordination of the SO’s activities and
      responsibilities under this Utility Privatization contract. The typical long-life of a UP
      contract, its many moving parts, and the fact that the SO owns the utility system(s),
      requires a close, long-term partnership between the government and the SO. The
      deliberate and methodical approach to the development and maintenance of this QASP


                                               15
                             UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
                                     (Installation Name, State) (system(s))


   will help ensure this partnership continues to be nurtured, resulting in long-term quality
   utility service to (insert installation name).




Appendices
  Appendix A – FORM – QASP Periodic Maintenance, Review & Acceptance
  Appendix B – FORM – Performance Report
  Appendix C – FORM – Contract Discrepancy Report (CDR) (DD Form 2772)
  Appendix D – FORM – COR Monthly Report to the Contracting Officer
  Appendix E – CHECKLIST – Operational Transition Plan (NOTE: Remove link and
  insert “(removed)” after the word “Plan” after successful completion of the
  Operational Transition Plan…Do not include this note as part of the QASP document.)
  Appendix F – CHECKLIST – Service Interruption Contingency and Catastrophic Loss
  Plan
  Appendix G – CHECKLIST – Operations and Maintenance Plan
  Appendix H – CHECKLIST – Initial System Deficiency Corrections / Renewals and
  Replacements Plan
  Appendix I – CHECKLIST – Other Areas to be Monitored




                                            16
UP QASP – Contract No. SP0600-XX-C-XXXX 2013
        (Installation Name, State) (system(s))




APPENDICES




          17
                                         Appendix A

              QASP PERIODIC MAINTENANCE, REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE

(NOTE: This Appendix serves as a recommended form to use in formally documenting the
review, and acceptance, of the contents of the latest QASP version for the UP contract…Do
not include this note as part of the QASP document.)
(Back to Table of Contents)

The multi-functional team members’ signatures below indicate their review and acceptance of
the Quality Assurance & Surveillance Plan, dated _________ , for (insert type utility system)
services provided at (insert installation name) under contract (insert contract number). These
signatures indicate coordination on this Government QASP at the time of (insert “development”
or “revision”) and will remain in effect until the Plan is modified.



___________________________                               ____________________________
Signature/Date                                            Signature/Date
(insert name of Government Contracting Officer)           (insert name of COR)
(insert title and organization)



___________________________
Signature/Date
(insert name of utility company rep)
(insert company name & title)




                                              18
                                          Appendix B

                                 PERFORMANCE REPORT

(NOTE: This Appendix illustrates the form to be used in the documentation of SO
performance on the UP contract…Do not include this note as part of the QASP document.)
(Back to Table of Contents)

The COR shall complete a Performance Report (shown below) whenever the COR performs contract
monitoring/surveillance on the Utility Privatization contract.




                                  Performance Report Form

                                               19
                                            Appendix C

                 CONTRACT DISCREPANCY REPORT (CDR) (DD Form 2772)

                              (Used to formally document discrepancies)

(NOTE: This Appendix illustrates the form to be used in the formal documentation of specific
SO performance discrepancies/problems on the UP contract, as they are encountered by the
COR…Do not include this note as part of the QASP document.)
(Back to Table of Contents)
The DD Form 2772, SO Discrepancy Report (CDR), shown below, will be prepared by the COR
to formally notify the SO of a pending discrepancy. The purpose of the form is to allow the SO
to correct discrepancies with minimal interference from the Government.




A fillable version of this form can be found at:
           http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/infomgt/forms/dd/ddforms2500-2999.htm

                                                 20
                                            Appendix D

                COR MONTHLY REPORT TO THE CONTRACTING OFFICER

                               (DoD CORT Tool Reporting Requirement)

(NOTE: This Appendix illustrates the form to be used in the monthly summary of
documented SO performance on the UP contract. This is a DoD CORT Tool
requirement…Do not include this note as part of the QASP document.)
(Back to Table of Contents)
The COR shall complete a COR Monthly Report to the Contracting Officer (shown below) to document
both negative and positive aspects of the SO’s performance for the UP contract. The report shall be
submitted to the KO in accordance with a mutually established submittal schedule.




                        COR Monthly Report to the Contracting Officer (pg. 1)

                                                 21
                           Appendix D

COR MONTHLY REPORT TO THE CONTRACTING OFFICER (cont’d)




       COR Monthly Report to the Contracting Officer (pg. 2)




                                22
                                                                              Appendix E

                                                     OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST

            (NOTE: This Appendix serves as a checklist to ensure actions necessary for sufficient monitoring of the SO’s Operational
            Transition Plan – and the SO’s associated demonstrated actions for compliance – are accomplished by the COR and other
            Government representatives. Upon successful completion of the Operational Transition Period, this appendix can be removed
            from future versions of the QASP…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)
            (Back to Table of Contents)
            1. Initial Contract Documentation/Requirements:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement              SO Requirement          Frequency of             Method of           Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                         Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring    Section/Paragraph

  a.     UP Contract Document –              SO ensures that the           Initial        Contract Oversight –KO     All Contract Sections
         DLA Energy Contracting Staff        current/accurate UP                          Acknowledgement and
         ensures that the UP Contract        Contract is received and                      receipt of SO’s written       (insert correct
         document, with any associated       provide written                                 acknowledgement           reference(s) to be
         modifications, is provided to the   concurrence to this                                                     consistent with actual
         COR/SO                              requirement                                                                    contract)

  b.     Periodic Deliverables/Report        SO will acknowledge           Initial                 N/A                  J/L/C Sections
         Submittals – COR will               and provide comments
         establish operational report        to report requirements                                                      (insert correct
         requirements with the KO and                                                                                  reference(s) to be
         SO                                                                                                          consistent with actual
                                                                                                                            contract)
          Establish mutual agreement
           with KO, Installation reps,
           and SO on the specific
           format of each required
           report, as well as
           confirming frequency of
           submittal.
                                                                                     23
                                                                               Appendix E

                                                OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

  c.     Initial QASP Development &         SO and the COR will           As required            As required               J Section
         Implementation – COR and           discuss all details for
         KO will layout detailed plan for   QASP guidance and how                                                        (insert correct
         QASP implementation with the       it relates to the current                                                  reference(s) to be
         SO                                 contract                                                                 consistent with actual
                                                                                                                            contract)

  d.     Establishment of COR Areas         SO will work with COR           Initial                  All             All Contract Sections
         of Inspection List – COR           and Government
         ensures an initial list of         representatives to                                                           (insert correct
         representative areas of            determine an initial array                                                 reference(s) to be
         inspections (i.e. facilities and   of mutually acceptable                                                   consistent with actual
         documentation) is developed.       areas (facilities and                                                           contract)
         List is developed through          documentation) from
         meetings with the SO and           which SO performance
         appropriate Government             can be reasonably
         representatives.                   assessed.




            2. Conduct Post-Award Orientation Conference:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement             SO Requirement            Frequency of             Method of          Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                          Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     Post-Award Orientation             The SO prepares and             Initial                 N/A                  C/L Sections
         Conference and Agenda              organizes for the O&M
         Development – KO/COR               Transition Meeting, to                                                       (insert correct
         organizes Post-Award               include provision of                                                       reference(s) to be
         Orientation Conference.            recommended meeting                                                      consistent with actual
                                                                                      24
                                                                                Appendix E

                                                   OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

         COR coordinates with SO to            topics to the COR.                                                              contract)
         determine specific SO-
         recommended agenda items for          The SO ensures that all
         discussion at conference.             required personnel
                                               attend this meeting

  b.     COR Review of Operational             The SO verifies that the    As needed              Once a month               C/L Sections
         Transition Plan – COR                 contract information is
         reviews the UP Contract               correct                                                                       (insert correct
         Transitional Plan for accuracy                                                                                    reference(s) to be
                                                                                                                         consistent with actual
                                                                                                                                contract)

  c.     Utility System Conveyance             SO will ensure that all       Initial           COR will record a             C/L Sections
         Meeting – COR sets up a future        key personnel are in                          Memorandum for Record
         Utility System Conveyance             attendance at this                             (MFR) for this action          (insert correct
         Meeting between Installation          meeting.                                                                    reference(s) to be
         Personnel and SO                                                                                                consistent with actual
                                                                                                                                contract)



            3. Permits and Leases/Easements:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement                SO Requirement          Frequency of             Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                           Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

  a.     Identify Permits and                  The UP SO provides a        As required      Assessment of Deliverables    Sections C.3, C.6,
         Associated SO Responsibility          specific listing to the                                                    C.9. C.10, and L.4
         – Ensure SO provides specific         COR, along with status,
         listing of all permits for which it   of all permits the SO                                                         (insert correct
         has responsibility in the             will be responsible for                                                     reference(s) to be
                                                                                       25
                                                                          Appendix E

                                             OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

     ownership, operation,               under the contract.                                                    consistent with actual
     maintenance, and/or upgrade of                                                                                   contract)
     the specific utility system under
     the contract.

      Coordinate this list with the
       appropriate Installation
       office(s) to ensure
       concurrence and mutual
       understanding of
       responsibilities.

b.   Permit/Lease Applications –         The SO prepares all the    As required           As required               C/L Sections
     KO/COR ensures that the SO          required documentation
     applies for applicable permits      for obtaining the                                                          (insert correct
     and leases.                         specified permits/leases                                                 reference(s) to be
                                         within the necessary                                                   consistent with actual
      The KO/COR provides               timeframes to                                                                 contract)
       guidance to the SO, as            ensure/maintain
       necessary, for obtaining the      compliance.
       permits/leases.

c.   Line Locates Plan/Procedures        The SO verifies their        Monthly       During and after the Post       C/L Sections
     – KO/COR ensures all specific       understanding of the       Permit status     Award Orientation
     procedures associated with the      Installation’s Digging        reports            Conference                (insert correct
     SO’s responsibilities for           Permit procedures, to                                                    reference(s) to be
     locating lines in support of the    include:                                                               consistent with actual
     Installation Digging Permit                                                                                       contract)
     Process are clarified and            the Installation
     documented.                           office(s) with which
                                           to coordinate line
                                                                               26
                                                                       Appendix E

                                          OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

                                        locate actions
                                       the maximum number
                                        of free line locate
                                        actions to be provided
                                        under the contract
                                        (i.e. threshold)
                                       additional costs per
                                        locate action (if any)
                                        for providing line
                                        locates above the
                                        established threshold

d.   Review of Current                The SO will:               After the Post     As required       C/L Sections
     Agreements for                                                  award
     Appurtenances Attached to         confirm                   Orientation                         (insert correct
     Utility System Infrastructure      understanding of the       Meeting                          reference(s) to be
     – The COR ensures that all         current agreements                                        consistent with actual
     applicable Offices of Primary      and associated                                                   contract)
     Responsibility (OPRs) identify     attachments
     to the SO all items that are      work with the
     current attachments to the SO’s    applicable OPRs, as
     inventory (ex. Cable TV lines,     necessary, to identify
     Cell phone antennae, fiber optic   any potential issues
     lines, etc, that are attached      that may need to be
     through manholes or strung on      addressed as part of
     top of power poles of the SO’s     any follow-on
     Utility System Inventory). The     agreement (once
     appurtenances must be clearly      current agreement
     identified and documented. The     expires).
     COR ensures that all current
                                                                             27
                                                                              Appendix E

                                               OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

         agreements associated with
         each attachment are provided to
         the SO.



            4. Security Requirements:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement           Frequency of             Method of          Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                        Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     Security Clearances – COR         The SO prepares and          As required            As required             C/L Sections
         verifies through the Security     submits all required
         Office that all contracted        documentation for                                                           (insert correct
         personnel have the required       obtaining a Government                                                    reference(s) to be
         JPAS verifications, security      Security Clearance; SO                                                  consistent with actual
         clearances and access badges.     will ensure that security                                                      contract)
                                           documentation is filled
                                           out correctly and
                                           submitted in a timely
                                           manner.

  b.     SO Vehicle Registration,          The SO ensures that         At the start of         As required             C/L Sections
         Insurance, Installation Acces     their vehicles are            transition
         – COR/KO review the SO            currently registered,        period; then                                   (insert correct
         confirmation that SO vehicles     meet insurance                for every                                   reference(s) to be
         are registered, meet insurance    requirements, and have        change in                                 consistent with actual
         requirements, and have access     access stickers for         vehicle and/or                                     contract)
         stickers for Installation         Installation access then     registration
                                           notifies COR.                   status

                                                                                    28
                                                                                Appendix E

                                                  OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

                                                                            thereafter



  c.     Physical Security and                Based upon discussions       As required              As required              Section C.5
         Restricting Access to                and/or information
         Facilities – COR ensures SO          received from the                                                             (insert correct
         meets with and/or is provided        Security Office, SO will                                                    reference(s) to be
         applicable requirements from         demonstrate how it will                                                   consistent with actual
         the Security Office pertaining to    satisfy the physical                                                             contract)
         sufficient physical security of,     security requirements for
         and restrictive access to, utility   its utility system and
         system and associated facilities     associated facilities.



            5. Budget/IT Requirements:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement               SO Requirement           Frequency of               Method of          Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                           Occurrence         Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     Summary Budget/                      The SO will provide a        As required              As required             C/L Sections
         Expenditure Report                   summary
         Submittal – COR will ensure          budget/expenditure                                                            (insert correct
         that the SO provides summary         report to the KO.                                                           reference(s) to be
         budget/expenditure report to the                                                                               consistent with actual
         KO                                                                                                                    contract)

  b.     Initial IT Requirements              The SO will inform the       As required              As required             C/L Sections
         Meeting – The KO/COR                 Govt of all IT
         conducts initial IT                  requirements that will be                                                     (insert correct
                                                                                                                          reference(s) to be
                                                                                         29
                                                                         Appendix E

                                           OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

     Communications meeting w/SO       needed/required and                                          consistent with actual
     to discuss the IT requirements    specify all required IT                                            contract)
     for Communications under the      software packages; SO
     Utility Services contract.        confirms its IT
                                       Communications Plan
                                       does not interfere with
                                       the Installation’s
                                       communications
                                       frequencies.

c.   IT/Communications Office          The SO and COR will          As required       As required       C/L Sections
     Coordination – The COR            discuss all IT
     ensures appropriate               requirements and                                                 (insert correct
     coordination occurs between the   collaborate on a                                               reference(s) to be
     SO and Base                       suggested plan of action                                     consistent with actual
     IT/Communications Office          for the use of all IT                                               contract)
     regarding the contract’s          systems and software;
     Information Technology            SO will demonstrate to
     requirements                      the IT/Communication
                                       Office’s satisfaction that
                                       its IT Communications
                                       Plan does not interfere
                                       with the Installation’s
                                       communications
                                       frequencies.



        6. SO Personnel Policies:


                                                                              30
                                                                            Appendix E

                                               OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement          Frequency of             Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                       Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

  a.     Installation Personnel Policy –   The SO will participate       Initial        Review and verification of       C/L Sections
         KO/COR will inform the SO         in discussions regarding                     personnel policies with SO
         about personnel policies          applicable personnel                                                          (insert correct
         pertaining to SO personnel        policy requirements and                                                     reference(s) to be
         working on the Installation.      will verify                                                               consistent with actual
                                           understanding of these                                                           contract)
                                           policies.

  b.     Invoice & Payroll Procedures/     SO shall prepare            As required      Review and verification of       C/L Sections
         Documentation – KO/COR            invoices and payroll-                           samples/procedures
         will discuss and reach mutual     related documentation in                         submitted by SO              (insert correct
         understanding on procedures for   accordance with                                                             reference(s) to be
         accomplishing invoices and        procedure established                                                     consistent with actual
         payroll-related documentation.    with the KO/COR.                                                                 contract)

                                           (Note: Any necessary re-
                                           submittals shall be
                                           accomplished by the SO
                                           at own expense.)




                                                                                   31
                                                                              Appendix E

                                               OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

            7. Joint Inventory:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement           Frequency of              Method of          Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                        Occurrence        Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     Joint Inventory Review and        The SO will ensure the      Initial start of         Constantly             C/J/L Sections
         Documentation – The               all pertinent inventory         contact
         KO/COR will conduct and           information is captured                                                      (insert correct
         document a Government – SO        and recorded and a full                                                    reference(s) to be
         Joint Inventory of Equipment      concurrence meeting                                                      consistent with actual
         and Property                      with all parties occur as                                                       contract)
                                           it relates to this
                                           inventory

  b.     Points of Demarcation (PODs)      The SO will ensure the      Initial start of        Continuously          Attachment JAX of
         – Ensure all PODs are             all pertinent POD              contract                                        Contract
         identified, understood, and       information is captured
         mutually agreeable. (Note:        and recorded and a full                                                      (insert correct
         PODs identify the physical and    mutual concurrence is                                                      reference(s) to be
         geographic limits/boundaries of   obtained.                                                                consistent with actual
         the utility system being                                                                                          contract)
         transitioned to the new owner
         (i.e. SO)).

  c.     Reconciliation of Inventory –     The SO will                 Initial start of     Joint Reconciliation       C/J/L Sections
         The COR/KO will review,           reconcile/adjust                contact           between Govt/SO
         verify, and reconcile, as         inventory listing, as                                                        (insert correct
         necessary, the SO’s field         necessary, to reflect                                                      reference(s) to be
         verified listing of inventory     mutually agreed                                                          consistent with actual
         data.                             inventory.                                                                      contract)

                                                                                     32
                                                                                  Appendix E

                                                 OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

            8. Service Requirements:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement               SO Requirement             Frequency of           Method of          Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                             Occurrence     Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     Verification of Service             The SO submits a                As required          As required            C/J/L Sections
         Support Requirements –              detailed list of all service
         KO/COR verifies all service         requirements to COR                                                          (insert correct
         requirements from the SO, i.e.      and KO for review and                                                      reference(s) to be
         trash, lighting, building           appropriate action.                                                      consistent with actual
         location, telephone service, etc.                                                                                   contract)




            9. Records Management:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement               SO Requirement             Frequency of           Method of          Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                             Occurrence     Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     Availability of Government          The SO will submit a            As required          As required            C/J/L Sections
         Utility System Records – The        detailed list of CADD,
         COR will ensure that all            GIS, Maintenance                                                             (insert correct
         CADD, GIS, Maintenance              Records, Manuals and                                                       reference(s) to be
         Records, Manuals, and As-Built      as-built drawings                                                        consistent with actual
         drawings are made available to      requests to the COR                                                             contract)
         the SO upon request.                through the KO.




                                                                                       33
                                                                                Appendix E

                                                 OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

            10. Environmental Compliance:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement              SO Requirement            Frequency of             Method of              Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                           Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring       Section/Paragraph

  a.     Initial Installation                SO will discuss all             Initial                   N/A                   C/J/L Sections
         Environmental Meeting – The         applicable
         COR arranges for an                 environmental                                                                    (insert correct
         Installation Environmental          concerns/issues with                                                           reference(s) to be
         meeting between SO and              Installation                                                                 consistent with actual
         Government                          Environmental                                                                       contract)
                                             Personnel

  b.     Identification of RCRA and          SO must acknowledge to       After the Post        Meeting minutes and          C/J/L Sections
         CERCLA-listed Sites on the          COR the receipt of the        Orientation        follow-on memos/letters
         Installation – The COR ensures      Installation’s RCLA and       Conference       documenting transfer of the       (insert correct
         the identification of all RCRA-     CERCLA listed site                             information/documentation.      reference(s) to be
         listed sites (current “cradle-to-   information (maps, site                                                      consistent with actual
         grave” operations managing          condition information,                                                              contract)
         generated hazardous wastes)         reports, site agreements,
         and CERCLA-listed sites             etc).
         (contaminated from past
         operations) are clearly             SO will ensure the
         identified, documented, and         proper arrangements and
         communicated to the SO.             precautions are taken
                                             when conducting daily
          Arrange for an Installation       operations in these areas.
           Environmental meeting with
           the SO and Government
           representatives.
                                                                                       34
                                                      Appendix E

                                   OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

 COR ensures appropriate
  environmental information
  supplied by the Installation
  Environmental Office (maps,
  site condition information,
  reports, site agreements, etc)
  is provided/communicated to
  the SO.




                                                          35
                                                                           Appendix E

                                              OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

            11. Contingency Operations:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement        Frequency of              Method of            Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                     Occurrence        Surveillance/Monitoring     Section/Paragraph

  a.     Installation Contingency          KO/COR and SO will       Initial start of         Continuous               C/J/L Sections
         Operations Plan Briefing –        discuss a plan of            contact
                                                                                                                       (insert correct
         The COR/KO briefs the             operations for support
                                                                                                                     reference(s) to be
         Installation Contingency          of Contingency                                                          consistent with actual
         Operations Plan to the SO         Operations at the                                                              contract)
         and discusses specific,           Installation
         applicable support
         requirements for execution
         under the UP contract.

  b.     Installation Contingency          The SO will ensure           Initial           COR will ensure a           C/J/L Sections
         Operations Formal                 that a detailed                             Memorandum for Record
                                                                                                                       (insert correct
         Support Agreement – The           Contingency                                      (MFR) or other
                                                                                                                     reference(s) to be
         KO/COR will ensure an             Checklist, consistent                       appropriate document is     consistent with actual
         appropriate agreement is          with the terms of the                        recorded for this action          contract)
         conveyed/developed                conveyed/developed
         describing all pertinent          support agreement, is
         aspects of Operational            developed, and
         Contingency Functions             coordinated with the
         support that is required of the   KO/COR.
         SO.



                                                                                  36
                   Appendix E

OPERATIONAL TRANSITION PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)




                       37
                                                                               Appendix F

                             SERVICE INTERRUPTION CONTINGENCY & CATASTROPHIC LOSS PLAN -- CHECKLIST

           (NOTE: This Appendix serves as a checklist to ensure actions necessary for sufficient monitoring of the SO’s Service Interruption
           Contingency & Catastrophic Loss Plan – and the SO’s associated demonstrated actions for compliance – are accomplished by the
           COR and other Government representatives…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)
           (Back to Table of Contents)


Item #    COR Action / Requirement              SO Requirement            Frequency of          Method of           Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                           Occurrence    Surveillance/Monitoring    Section/Paragraph

  a.     Receipt of Initial Service          SO will ensure its initial   Upon award      COR/KO will perform           C/L Sections
         Interruption Contingency &          Service Interruption         of contract     review of all submitted
         Catastrophic Loss Plan –            Contingency &                                      documents               (insert correct
         KO/COR will ensure receipt of       Catastrophic Loss Plan                                                   reference(s) to be
         SO’s initial Service Interruption   has been submitted to                                                  consistent with actual
         Contingency & Catastrophic          the COR.                                                                      contract)
         Loss Plan.

         (Temporary Editor Note:
         Ensure yellow-highlighted COR
         action requirements are
         consistently displayed in
         Appendices E, G, and H for the
         other three major plans.)

  b.     Verification and                    N/A                          Upon award      COR/KO will perform           C/L Sections
         Coordination of Initial                                          of contract     review of all submitted
         Service Interruption                (Internal Government                               documents               (insert correct
         Contingency & Catastrophic          activity)                                                                reference(s) to be
         Loss Plan – KO/COR will                                                                                    consistent with actual
         ensure initial Service                                                                                            contract)

                                                                                    38
                                                                            Appendix F

                   SERVICE INTERRUPTION CONTINGENCY & CATASTROPHIC LOSS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

     Interruption Contigency &
     Catastrophic Loss Plan is
     reviewed/verified by the
     appropriate Installation
     personnel and
     comments/feedback are
     gathered. Installation personnel
     may include, but not be limited
     to:

      Fire & Law Enforcement
      Safety
      IT/Communications
      Civil Engineering/DPW
      Environmental
      Installation Leadership
      Hospital

c.   Feedback/Discussion of Initial        SO will ensure it is        Upon award     Assessment of Deliverables       C/L Sections
     Plan – COR/KO ensures                 available to discuss with   of contract
     discussions/meetings are              Government                                                                  (insert correct
     arranged with the SO (as              representatives, as                                                       reference(s) to be
     necessary) to address any issues      necessary.                                                              consistent with actual
     or questions related to the initial                                                                                  contract)
     Plan. The appropriate
     Installation personnel will also
     participate in these
     discussions/meetings, as
     necessary.

                                                                                 39
                                                                        Appendix F

                  SERVICE INTERRUPTION CONTINGENCY & CATASTROPHIC LOSS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

d.   Receipt of Proposed Changes        SO will ensure any          As needed        Assessment of Deliverables       C/L Sections
     to Service Interruption            proposed
     Contingency & Catastrophic         adjustments/revisions to                                                      (insert correct
     Loss Plan – KO/COR will            the Service Interruption                                                    reference(s) to be
     ensure that any                    Contingency &                                                             consistent with actual
     adjustments/revisions to the       Catastrophic Loss Plan                                                           contract)
     SO’s Service Interruption          are submitted to the
     Contingency & Catastrophic         COR in a timely
     Loss Plan (proposed by the SO)     manner, accompanied
     are received from the SO.          with clear supporting
                                        rationale/justification.

e.   Feedback/Discussion of             SO will ensure it is        As needed        Assessment of Deliverables       C/L Sections
     Proposed Changes to Service        available to discuss with
     Interruption Contingency &         Government                                                                    (insert correct
     Catastrophic Loss Plan –           representatives, as                                                         reference(s) to be
     COR/KO ensures                     necessary.                                                                consistent with actual
     discussions/meetings are                                                                                            contract)
     arranged with the SO (as
     necessary) to address any issues
     or questions related to proposed
     changes to the Plan. The
     appropriate Installation
     personnel will also participate
     in these discussions/meetings,
     as necessary. Installation
     personnel may include, but not
     be limited to:

      Fire & Law Enforcement

                                                                                40
                                                                       Appendix F

                   SERVICE INTERRUPTION CONTINGENCY & CATASTROPHIC LOSS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

        Safety
        IT/Communications
        Civil Engineering/DPW
        Environmental
        Installation Leadership
        Hospital

f.   Oversight of Service              SO responded to service    Upon award         Sample Reviews          C/L Sections
     Interruption Contingency &        requests in accordance     of contract
     Catastrophic Loss Plan –          with response time                                                    (insert correct
     COR/KO will provide oversight     requirements identified                                             reference(s) to be
     of the Plan, to include the       in the contract.                                                  consistent with actual
     ongoing development of this                                                                                contract)
     action item checklist.

g.   Coordination of Scheduled         SO will provide            As required       Direct Observation      Section C.X of
     Utility Service Outages – COR     notification to affected                                                Contract
     will verify each scheduled        parties IAW established                              &
     service outage is coordinated     policy as part of the                                                 (insert correct
                                                                                        Review of          reference(s) to be
     with all affected parties a       contract.                                    Invoices/Payments
     minimum of two weeks in                                                                             consistent with actual
     advance. In addition to the                                                                                contract)
     directly affected organization,
     ensure coordination with
     appropriate Installations reps
     (i.e. Fire Department,
     Engineering, etc).




                                                                            41
                                                                        Appendix F

                  SERVICE INTERRUPTION CONTINGENCY & CATASTROPHIC LOSS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

h.   Re-scheduling of Work              SO will provide            As required          Direct Observation          Section C.X of
     Requiring Service                  notification to COR, and                                                       Contract
     Interruption – COR will            affected parties, of the
     verify, in writing, the SO’s       date/time work can be                                                        (insert correct
     policy regarding the re-           re-scheduled. Also, SO                                                     reference(s) to be
     scheduling of service              will notify COR (with                                                    consistent with actual
     interruptions due to mission       supporting rationale) if                                                        contract)
     requirements.                      additional charges will
                                        be requested as a result
      If additional charges may        of the re-scheduling.
       result, determine the factors
       that would lead the SO to
       request for additional
       charges.
      Review this policy with
       appropriate Installation reps
       (i.e. Fire Department,
       Engineering, etc.) as
       necessary.
      Verify the proper
       dissemination of policy to
       affected parties/
       organizations (including
       Facility Managers).

i.   Re-validation of SO’s Service      SO will make available      Annually        Assessment of Deliverables      Section C.X of
     Request Procedures –COR            to the COR – and meet                                                          Contract
     will annually coordinate a         to discuss -- all
     review of the SO procedures in     necessary                                                                    (insert correct
     place for receiving, processing,   documentation related to                                                   reference(s) to be

                                                                               42
                                                            Appendix F

             SERVICE INTERRUPTION CONTINGENCY & CATASTROPHIC LOSS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

managing, and acting upon           the SO’s service call                consistent with actual
service requests.                   operation.                                 contract)

 Review criteria/definitions
  used for classifying Service
  requests.
 Confirm the completeness of
  typical information taken
  during initial receipt and
  follow-up of service call (i.e.
  the time of call, time of
  response, cause of the
  request, action taken, and
  time and date of completion)
 Review service call log to
  assess track record on
  service call responses.
    o Identify any
       positive/negative trends.
    o Verify whether service
       calls are being resolved
       within established time
       limits.




                                                                43
                                                                              Appendix G

                                    OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST

            (NOTE: This Appendix serves as a checklist to ensure actions necessary for sufficient monitoring of the SO’s Operations &
            Maintenance / Quality Management Plan – and the SO’s associated demonstrated actions for compliance – are accomplished by
            the COR and other Government representatives…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)
            (Back to Table of Contents)


            1. Meetings:
Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement           Frequency of             Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                        Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

  a.     Establish Post-Award              The SO prepares and              Initial      Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
         Orientation Conference –          organizes for the O&M       activation of O                                  reference(s) to be
         COR sets up a Post-Award          Transition Meeting, to      & M plan and                  &                consistent with actual
         Orientation Conference with the   include provision of           as needed          Direct Observation              contract)
         SO                                recommended meeting
                                           topics to the COR.                             (Weekly status meetings)
         COR establishes subsequent
         follow-on meetings, as
         necessary.

  b.     Final Inventory                   The SO will reconcile all        Initial      Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
         Reconciliation Meeting –          inventory discrepancies     activation of O                                  reference(s) to be
         KO/COR will perform a final       noted before activation     & M plan and                  &                consistent with actual
         Inventory Reconciliation          of O & M plan                  as needed          Direct Observation              contract)
         Meeting w/SO to ensure            commencement
         accuracy of system inventory                                                     (Weekly status meetings)
         being transferred to the SO
         prior to Contract Start Date.




                                                                                   44
                                                                          Appendix G

                          OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)




           2. Plans and Operation Initiatives:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement        Frequency of           Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                     Occurrence     Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

  a.     O&M Plan and Schedule –           SO will prepare a        Initial         Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
         KO/COR gives the SO gives         detailed list of         activation of                                  reference(s) to be
                                                                    O & M plan                  &                consistent with actual
         the SO timeline for O&M           expected deliverables
         plan and schedule                 for O&M plan             and as needed       Direct Observation              contract)

                                                                                     (Weekly status meetings)

  b.     Verification of Periodic          SO will provide/submit   Per mutually    Assessment of Deliverables      Sections C/J/L
         Deliverables/Report               all necessary               agreed
         Submittals – COR will ensure      deliverables/reports      schedules                                       (insert correct
         all deliverables/reports are      within the mutually                                                     reference(s) to be
         submitted by the SO IAW           agreed format and                                                     consistent with actual
         established schedules             schedules.                                                                   contract)

          Verify timeliness of
           submitted deliverables/
           reports
          Verify sufficiency of
           deliverable/report content
           with appropriate Installation
                                                                               45
                                                                        Appendix G

                       OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

       representatives.
      If any changes are required
       (to either content or
       format), coordinate issues
       with the SO and the
       appropriate Installation
       reps. Arrange meetings as
       necessary to address.

c.   Utility System Capacity            SO will provide the        Per mutually    Assessment of Deliverables      Sections C/J/L
     Analysis – COR will establish a    COR/KO a utility              agreed
     frequency with the SO in which     system capacity report      schedules                                       (insert correct
     the current capacity of the        within a mutually agreed                                                  reference(s) to be
     utility system is measured         format and schedules.                                                   consistent with actual
     (based on best available utility                                                                                  contract)
     system information) and
     reported to the appropriate
     Installation reps for Base
     Master Planning purposes.

      Verify timeliness of system
       capacity analysis report
      Verify sufficiency of report
       with appropriate Installation
       reps
      If any changes are required
       (to either content or
       format), coordinate issues
       with the UP SO and the
       appropriate Installation
                                                                              46
                                                                   Appendix G

                     OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

        representatives. Arrange
        meetings as necessary to
        address.

d.   Monitoring O&M Plan           SO will start gathering   Initial         Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
     Progress – KO/COR will        all required              activation of                                  reference(s) to be
                                                             O & M plan                  &                consistent with actual
     monitor the progress of the   documentation for the
     SO’s O&M plan                 preparation of the        and as needed       Direct Observation              contract)
                                   O&M plan
                                                                              (Weekly status meetings)

e.   O&M Performance Plan          The SO will brief the     Initial         Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
     Review – KO/COR will          KO/COR with               activation of                                  reference(s) to be
                                                             O & M plan                  &                consistent with actual
     review the SO’s O&M           execution of the
     Performance Plan for the      Performance Plan for      and as needed       Direct Observation              contract
     future Operation and          the utility system
                                                                              (Weekly status meetings)
     Maintenance of the utility
     system

f.   Review of O&M                 The SO will prepare       Initial         Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
     Performance Plan              and submit a detailed     activation of                                  reference(s) to be
                                                             O & M plan                  &                consistent with actual
     Requirements – COR and        plan for all operations
     KO will meet with the SO to   and maintenance           and as needed       Direct Observation              contract)
                                                             thereafter
     discuss the requirements in   contract requirements
                                                                              (Weekly status meetings)
     O&M plan

     -Schedule Inspections

     -Maintenance and Repairs

                                                                        47
                                                                       Appendix G

                       OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

     -Predictive Maintenance

     -Annual Maintenance Plan

g.   Employee Training Plan            The SO will prepare a     Initial         Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
     Meeting – COR will meet           detailed plan for all     activation of                                  reference(s) to be
     with SO to discuss the SO’s       employees training        O & M plan                                   consistent with actual
     Employee Training Plan            and the topics            and as needed                                       contract)
                                                                 thereafter
                                       covered.

h.   Quality Assurance Plan            The SO will prepare       Initial         Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
     Review – KO/COR will              and brief the KO/COR      activation of                                  reference(s) to be
     review the SO’s Quality           on the Quality            O & M plan                                   consistent with actual
     Assurance Plan                    Assurance Plan            and as needed                                       contract)
                                                                 thereafter

i.   OSHA-related Safety Plans –       SO Submits applicable     Initial         Assessment of Deliverables      Sections C/J/L
     KO/COR ensure applicable          OSHA-related Safety       activation of
     OSHA-related Safety plans         plans to COR for review   O & M plan                                       (insert correct
     undergo appropriate review by                               and as needed                                  reference(s) to be
     Government representatives.                                 thereafter                                   consistent with actual
     OSHA-related plans may                                                                                          contract)
     include, but not be limited to,
     the following:

      OSHA Generator
       Emergency Preparation
       Plan
      OSHA Workplace
       Sanitation Plan

                                                                            48
                                                                         Appendix G

                        OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

      OSHA Office Safety Plan
      OSHA Personal Protective
       Equipment Safety Plan
      OSHA Confined Space Plan
      OSHA Fire/Electrical
       Safety/Seismic Plan
      OSHA Safety Audit
       Checklist

j.   Other Plans – KO/COR ensure         SO Submits applicable     Initial         Assessment of Deliverables        Sections C/J/L
     applicable plans undergo            plans to COR for review   activation of
     appropriate review by                                         O & M plan                                         (insert correct
     Government representatives.                                   and as needed                                    reference(s) to be
     These plans may include, but                                  thereafter                                     consistent with actual
     not be limited to, the following:                                                                                   contract)

      Hazardous Material Safety
       Plan
      Hazardous Material Waste
       Handling Plan
      Earthquake Preparation
       Plan
      Storm Preparation Plan

k.   Cost Proposals and Cost                                                       Assessment of Deliverables
     Performance Data Review –
     COR reviews SO’s cost                                                          (Note: Cost Proposal and
     proposals and cost performance                                                Cost Performance Data may
     data and provides comments to                                                 be appropriate for inclusion
                                                                                      in the annual CPARS

                                                                              49
                                                                                Appendix G

                           OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

         the KO.                                                                                assessment.)

  l.     Responsiveness to               SO will meet with COR        As needed              Direct Observation
         Government Inquiries – COR      to provide prompt
         will meet with SO to discuss    response to COR, KO,                             (Note: Responsiveness to
         their prompt responding to      and CS                                          Government inquiries may
         questions and concerns from                                                     be appropriate for inclusion
         Customer, COR, KO, and CS                                                          in the annual CPARS
                                                                                                 assessment.)


            3. System Deficiency Corrections/Renewals/Replacements:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement          SO Requirement            Frequency of              Method of               Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                       Occurrence        Surveillance/Monitoring        Section/Paragraph

  a.     Scope Review of System          SO will brief the            Initial            Assessment of Deliverables         (insert correct
         Deficiency Corrections –        KO/COR on all pending        activation of O                                     reference(s) to be
         KO/COR will start the review    System Deficiency            & M plan and                    &                 consistent with actual
         of anticipated System           Corrections needed for       as needed              Direct Observation                contract)
         Deficiency Corrections to the   current UP system
         current UP System                                                                (Weekly status meetings)

  b.     Schedule Review of System       The SO will prepare a        Initial            Assessment of Deliverables         (insert correct
         Deficiency Corrections –        detail plan for the future   activation of O                                     reference(s) to be
         KO/COR will review future       plan in regards to the       & M plan and                    &                 consistent with actual
         schedule for all anticipated    System Deficiency            as needed              Direct Observation                contract)
         System Deficiency Corrections   Corrections to the
         from the SO                     current UP System                                (Weekly status meetings)

  c.     Review of Renewals and          The SO will brief the        Initial            Assessment of Deliverables        (insert correct

                                                                                    50
                                                                             Appendix G

                        OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

     Replacements/Upgrades               KO/COR on all                activation of O               &                  reference(s) to be
     Projects – KO/COR will              proposed future Initial      & M plan and                                   consistent with actual
     review all Initial Upgrades,        Upgrades, Renewals and       as needed             Direct Observation             contract)
     Renewals and Replacement            Replacement Projects                            (Weekly status meetings)
     Projects

d.   Service                             SO will make readily         Per mutually      Assessment of Deliverables      Sections C/J/L
     Connections/Disconnections          available, within            agreed format
     Specifications – COR will           mutually agreed format       and schedules                                      (insert correct
     coordinate with SO to ensure        and timetables, all                                                           reference(s) to be
     design specifications for any       applicable design                                                           consistent with actual
     service connection or               specifications for service                                                         contract)
     disconnection are provided to       connections to be used
     the appropriate Installation        on a facility/utility
     representatives/third party         construction project that
     entities at the appropriate time    will ultimately connect
     period. The purpose will be to      to the SO’s utility
     eliminate potential disruption to   system.
     design, funding, and/or
     construction processes related
     to the specific construction
     event, in advance of connection
     to the SO’s utility system.

      Arrange meetings as
       necessary to address.


        4. Data Transfer:


                                                                                  51
                                                                              Appendix G

                           OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

Item #    COR Action / Requirement           SO Requirement            Frequency of             Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                        Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

  a.     Maps, Building Drawings and      The SO will ensure that      Initial           Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
         Pertinent Facility Files –       all required maps,           activation of O                                  reference(s) to be
         KO/COR will ensure that the      building drawings and        & M plan and                  &                consistent with actual
         SO has the all required maps,    all pertaining facility      as needed             Direct Observation              contract)
         building drawings and all        files are received
         pertinent facility files                                                         (Weekly status meetings)

  b.     GIS Data – KO/COR will           The SO will ensure that      Initial           Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
         provide the SO with all needed   a list of all required GIS   activation of O                                  reference(s) to be
         GIS data to support the O & M    requirements are             & M plan and                  &                consistent with actual
         plan                             submitted to the             as needed             Direct Observation              contract)
                                          KO/COR
                                                                                          (Weekly status meetings)

  c.     Transfer of Permits,             The SO will give the              Initial      Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
         Documents, and Manuals –         KO/COR a list of             activation of O                                  reference(s) to be
         KO/COR will complete the         required permits,            & M plan and                  &                consistent with actual
         transfer of permits, documents   documents, and manuals          as needed          Direct Observation              contract)
         and manuals                      that are needed
                                                                                          (Weekly status meetings)



            5. Environmental Compliance:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement           SO Requirement            Frequency of             Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                        Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

                                                                                   52
                                                                      Appendix G

                     OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE / QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

a.   Environmental Compliance        The SO will prepare and        Initial      Assessment of Deliverables       (insert correct
     Plan – KO/COR will review the   brief the KO/COR on       activation of O                                  reference(s) to be
     SO’s Environmental              the Environmental         & M plan and                  &                consistent with actual
     Compliance Plan                 Compliance Plan              as needed          Direct Observation              contract)

                                                                                  (Weekly status meetings)




                                                                           53
                                                                             Appendix H

                   INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST

           (NOTE: This Appendix serves as a checklist to ensure actions necessary for sufficient monitoring of the SO’s Initial System
           Deficiency Corrections / Renewables & Replacements Plan – and the SO’s associated demonstrated actions for compliance – are
           accomplished by the COR and other Government representatives…Do not include this note as part of final QASP document.)
           (Back to Table of Contents)

           1. Project Review/Master Planning:
Item #    COR Action / Requirement            SO Requirement            Frequency of             Method of            Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                         Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring     Section/Paragraph

  a.     Annual Submittal of Five -        The SO will prepare a          Annually        Assessment of Deliverable          C.11.4
         Year Plan – Ensure the Five -     detailed Plan
         Year Plan is submitted annually   documenting all                                                                (insert correct
         IAW the timeframe specified in    required System                                                              reference(s) to be
         the contract.                     Deficiency Corrections                                                     consistent with actual
                                           and major                                                                         contract)
                                           renewals/replacements
                                           that will need to occur
                                           for the next 5 years; SO
                                           identifies and prioritizes
                                           all necessary
                                           improvements to reach
                                           the standards typical
                                           maintained by the SO on
                                           its utility system




                                                                                     54
                                                             Appendix H

         INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

b.   Government Review of Five -      NA – Internal       Annually        Assessment of Deliverables          C.11.4
     Year Plan – Ensure the           Government review
     appropriate Government           activity                                    (Internal                (insert correct
     representatives review the                                           meetings/communications        reference(s) to be
     submitted Five -Year Plan                                              among Government           consistent with actual
     (engineering, environmental,                                             representatives.)               contract)
     security, etc) to confirm
     consistency with identified
     long-term missions/initiatives
     within their areas of
     responsibility.

      Ensure, as a minimum, all
       Government-identified
       requirements (i.e. upgrades,
       corrections, and R&R) are
       addressed by the SO




                                                                     55
                                                                      Appendix H

         INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

c.   Government/SO Meeting to        The SO will prepare and     Annually, and      Direct Observation          (insert correct
     Review, Discuss & Approve       present a priority plan       as needed                                  reference(s) to be
     Five -year Plan – Ensure the    for project execution and    throughout      (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
     appropriate Government          show the exact timeline          year       Government personnel and          contract)
     representatives meet with the   for project execution;                               the SO)
     SO to review, discuss, &        detailed                                                                Contract Sections
     approve the submitted Five -    schedules/scopes/costs                                                    C.11.2.2 and
     Year Plan. Items include (but   will be presented for                                                       C11.2.5
     are not limited to):            Year 1; generalized
                                     schedules/scopes/costs
      Recently completed            will be presented for
       Upgrade/Correction/R&R                                                                                Contract Sections
                                     Years 2 through 5 of the
       activity                                                                                               C.11.2.1/C.11.2.4
                                     Plan
      Upgrade/Correction/R&R
       Project Schedules & Scopes
      Interface/compatibility w/
       Installation Master Plan
      Utility System capacity
       modeling (and recommended
       improvements/adjustments/st
       udies) to address projected
       future load
      Other related issues (ex:
       regulatory changes, energy
       conservation, etc)




                                                                            56
                                                                        Appendix H

         INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

d.   Prioritization of Projects in     The SO will prepare and      As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
     the Five-Year Plan – The          present a priority plan                                                    reference(s) to be
     COR/KO will review the            for project execution and                      (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
     selection and Prioritization of   show the exact timeline                       Government personnel and          contract)
     Projects from the SO              for project execution                                  the SO)


e.   COR/SO Information                The SO will ensure that      As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
     Gathering Meeting – The           they extract and record                                                    reference(s) to be
     COR will interface with the SO    all important data from                        (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
     to help the SO gather all         the current Government                        Government personnel and          contract)
     important utility system          personnel, for the                                     the SO)
     information from the current      turnover instruction of
     installation staff.               the current utility system

f.   COR/SO Meeting with               The SO will ensure that      As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
     Installation’s Engineering        the Installation’s                                                         reference(s) to be
     and Planning Staff – COR will     Engineering Staff is                           (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
     coordinate with KO and SO to      available and proper                          Government personnel and          contract)
     ensure that a Meeting takes       coordination occurs with                               the SO)
     place with the Installation’s     the Government staff for
     Engineering and Planning Staff    proper dissemination of
                                       information




                                                                                57
                                                                              Appendix H

             INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

  g.     Review of Applicable                The SO will ensure that      As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
         Installation Policies &             all installation policies                                                  reference(s) to be
         Regulations Review Meeting          & regulations are                              (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
         – KO/COR will ensure that all       followed, and                                 Government personnel and          contract)
         applicable installation policies    compliance with these                                  the SO)
         & regulations -- with a potential   directives is mandated
         to interface with associated        (and disseminated) to all
         utility project activities -- are   contracted personnel
         covered and explained in detail
         to the SO.


           2. Specific Project Planning:
Item #    COR Action / Requirement              SO Requirement           Frequency of             Method of           Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                          Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring    Section/Paragraph

  a.     ISDC/Upgrades Project Phase         The SO will prepare and      As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
         Timeline Review – The               present a yearly time                                                      reference(s) to be
         Government and the SO will          phase project plan to the                      (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
         review the SO’s plan for project    Government for review                         Government personnel and          contract)
         phase timeline                      and concurrence                                        the SO)

  b.     ISDC/Upgrades Project               The SO will provide a        As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
         Review Meeting –                    detailed list of all ISDC                                                  reference(s) to be
                                             and Upgrade projects to                        (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
         Government and the SO will
                                             the Government for                            Government personnel and          contract)
         review all Initial System
                                             review and concurrence                                 the SO)
         Deficiency Correction (ISDC)
         and Upgrade projects identified



                                                                                      58
                                                                         Appendix H

         INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

c.   Coordination/Transfer of            The SO will be prepared     As needed           Direct Observation          (insert correct
     Project-Specific                    to discuss with                                                           reference(s) to be
     Engineering/Technical               Government                                    (Joint meetings between   consistent with actual
     Information – Ensure the            representative all                           Government personnel and          contract)
     appropriate Government              appropriate engineering                               the SO)
     representatives and third parties   technical data related to
     (if applicable) meet with the SO    specific upcoming
     to review, discuss, and transfer    projects in order to
     the appropriate engineering         minimize disruptions
     technical data related to a         during project execution.
     specific, upcoming project.
     Examples include (but are not
     limited to):

      Review Existing and
       Planned Future Third-Party
       Service Connections –
       technical specifications to
       ensure compatible &
       acceptable connection to the
       SO’s utility system.
      Inspection Activities –
       Agreement on the level (and
       intervals) of construction
       inspection activities by the
       UP SO (in cases where a
       third-party construction
       agent is involved).
      Material Submittals

                                                                                 59
                                                                               Appendix H

              INITIAL SYSTEM DEFICIENCY CORRECTIONS / RENEWALS & REPLACEMENTS PLAN -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)




            3. Post-Project Completion Actions:

Item #    COR Action / Requirement              SO Requirement           Frequency of             Method of             Contract Reference,      Remarks   Check
                                                                          Occurrence       Surveillance/Monitoring      Section/Paragraph

  a.     O&M / R&R Monthly Rate              The SO will prepare and         Upon          Assessment of Deliverables      Section C.11 of
         Adjustment – Ensure SO              present a report which      completion of                                        Contract
         provides applicable equitable       clearly details the          each capital      (SO-produced report and
         adjustments to the O&M and          changes to the utility       project (i.e.      joint meetings between         (insert correct
         R&R monthly charge as a result      system inventory, as           system         Government personnel and       reference(s) to be
         of the completion of the project.   well as the resulting         upgrades,                 the SO)            consistent with actual
                                             increase/decrease to the        R&R)                                              contract)
                                             monthly O&M / R&R
                                             service charge.

  b.     Update of As-Built Utility          The SO will update all       As needed         Direct COR Observation         C.5.1.5, Record
         System Drawings and GIS             applicable utility system                                                        Drawings
         Systems and System Utility          drawings (and any                                  Confirmation of
         Model – Upon completion of          associated documents)                               Deliverables               (insert correct
         each renewal and                    within (insert timeframe)                                                    reference(s) to be
         replacement/upgrade project,        and provide the COR a                                                      consistent with actual
         ensure SO provides updates to       copy of those drawings                                                            contract)
         applicable system drawings          & documents within
         according to the methodology        (insert timeframe)
         and timelines specified in the
         Contract.

                                                                                      60
                                                                                 Appendix I

                                                    OTHER AREAS TO BE MONITORED -- CHECKLIST

             (NOTE: This Appendix serves as a checklist to ensure actions necessary for sufficient monitoring of other areas -- in which the
             SO must demonstrate compliant actions -- are accomplished by the COR and other Government representatives…Do not include
             this note as part of final QASP document.)
             (Back to Table of Contents)


Item #    COR Action / Requirement               SO Requirement          Frequency of              Method of          Contract Reference,   Remarks   Check
                                                                          Occurrence        Surveillance/Monitoring   Section/Paragraph

  a.     COR/DLA Energy US COR               The SO will contact the     Initial start of            N/A                 (insert correct
         Program Manager Initial             DLA Energy UP COR               contact                                   reference(s) to be
         Contact – The COR will              Program Manager for                                                        consistent with
         establish initial contact with      initial contact                                                            actual contract)
         the DLA Energy UP COR
         Program Manager

  b.     Post-Award Orientation              The SO will ensure that:    Initial start of            N/A                 (insert correct
         Conference – The COR will                                           contact                                   reference(s) to be
         ensure:                                The proper SO                                                          consistent with
                                                 personnel attend the                                                   actual contract)
               Supporting logistics are         Post-Award
                arranged (i.e. date/time,        Orientation
                agenda, conference room,         Conference
                attendees, etc) for the UP      A recommended list
                Post-Award Orientation           of meeting agenda
                Conference (NOTE: This           topics is provided to
                meeting is the initial           the COR for
                meeting between the              coordination with
                Government and the SO --         the KO.
                the new owner of the
                utility system).

                                                                                       61
                                                                       Appendix I

                                          OTHER AREAS TO BE MONITORED -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

        An agenda of initial
         meeting topics is
         developed and coordinated
         with the UP SO and KO

c.   Points of Demarcation              The SO will ensure that    Annually         Assessment of     Attachment JAX of
     (PODs) – Ensure all PODs are       all pertinent POD                            Deliverables       Contract (insert
     identified/updated and             update information is                                         correct Attachment
     mutually agreeable. (Note:         captured and recorded                                             reference)
     PODs identify the physical and     and a full mutual
     geographic limits/boundaries       concurrence is obtained.                                        (insert correct
     of the SO’s utility system                                                                       reference(s) to be
     covered in this contract.                                                                         consistent with
                                                                                                       actual contract)

d.   SO Performance Assessment          The SO will provide a      As needed        Confirmation of   DFARS 242.1502
     Rating System (CPARS) --           list of all personnel to                     Deliverables
     Establishment and                  serve in the “SO Rep”                                           (insert correct
     Maintenance of Assigned            role in CPARS; SO will                                        reference(s) to be
     Roles – Ensure all appropriate     also provide updates to                                        consistent with
     Government and SO personnel        this listing as changes                                        actual contract)
     are enrolled in CPARS upon         occur.
     award of the contract; Maintain
     the list of enrollees thereafter

      Provide to the DLA Energy-
       FEE CPARS Focal Point the
       name(s) of installation-level
       Government personnel
       serving in the “Assessing
       Official Rep” role
                                                                               62
                                                                            Appendix I

                                           OTHER AREAS TO BE MONITORED -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

      Provide to the DLA Energy-
       FEE CPARS Focal Point the
       name(s) of SO personnel
       serving in the “SO Rep”
       role




e.   Re-affirm SO Responsibility        The SO provides an              Initially,       Assessment of   Sections C.3, C.6,
     for Permits (to include            updated specific listing       Annually           Deliverables   C.9. C.10, and L.4
     Submissions, Schedules and         to the COR, along with        (minimum),
     Associated Responsibilities) –     status, of all permits for   or as required                        (insert correct
     Ensure currency and accuracy       which the SO has                                                 reference(s) to be
     of SO-provided listing of all      responsibility under the                                          consistent with
     permits for which it has           contract.                                                         actual contract)
     responsibility in the ownership,
     operation, maintenance, and/or     The SO provides an
     upgrade of the specific utility    updated listing
     system under the contract.         whenever there is a
                                        change to the
      Coordinate this list with the    consolidated listing.
       appropriate Installation
       office(s) to ensure              The SO prepares all the
       concurrence and mutual           required documentation
       understanding of                 for obtaining the
       responsibilities.                specified permits.
      As necessary, COR                Digging Permits and
       confirms that the SO applies     Procedures shall be
       for any necessary permits at     included. The SO
       the required timeframes in
                                                                                 63
                                                                       Appendix I

                                           OTHER AREAS TO BE MONITORED -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

       order to remain compliant.       awareness of the
                                        Contract’s references
                                        for limitations of free
                                        line locates shall be
                                        acknowledged. The
                                        Contract’s references
                                        for limitations of non-
                                        free line locates shall
                                        also be acknowledged.




f.   Update of Quality Metrics          SO will work with COR     As required       All   All Contract Sections
     (Established List of COR           and Government
     Inspection Areas) – COR            representatives to                                   (insert correct
     ensures a list of representative   maintain a mutually                                reference(s) to be
     areas of inspections (i.e.         acceptable array of                                 consistent with
     facilities and documentation) is   areas (facilities and                               actual contract)
     maintained. List is developed      documentation) from
     through meetings with the SO       which SO performance
     and appropriate Government         can be reasonably
     representatives.                   assessed.

g.   Performance Deadlines –            SO will work with COR     As required       All      (insert correct
     COR should advise KO about         and Government                                     reference(s) to be
     the failure of SO to meet          representatives to meet                             consistent with
     performance deadlines. (Note:      or exceed performance                               actual contract)
     Complete a Contract                timelines.
     Discrepancy Report (DD Form
                                                                            64
                                                                       Appendix I

                                         OTHER AREAS TO BE MONITORED -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

     2772) if necessary)

h.   Safety Violations – COR           SO will work with COR      As required       All     (insert correct
     should advise KO about            and Government                                     reference(s) to be
     repeated safety violations.       representatives to                                  consistent with
     (Note: Complete a Contract        minimize or eliminate                               actual contract)
     Discrepancy Report (DD Form       safety violations.
     2772) if necessary)

i.   Poor Work Quality – COR           SO will work with COR      As required       All     (insert correct
     should advise KO about            and Government                                     reference(s) to be
     repeated incidents of SO’s poor   representatives to                                  consistent with
     quality work. (Note: Complete     perform quality work.                               actual contract)
     a Contract Discrepancy Report
     (DD Form 2772) if necessary)

j.   Prolonged Delays – COR            SO will work with COR      As required       All     (insert correct
     should advise KO about            and Government                                     reference(s) to be
     prolonged delays. (Note:          representatives to avoid                            consistent with
     Complete a Contract               prolonged delays.                                   actual contract)
     Discrepancy Report (DD Form
     2772) if necessary)

k.   Persistent Complaints – COR       SO will work with COR      As required       All     (insert correct
     should advise KO about            and Government                                     reference(s) to be
     persistent complaints from        representatives to                                  consistent with
     Government employees,             resolve complaints from                             actual contract)
     inspectors, and subcontractor’s   Government employees,
     site workers. (Note: Complete     inspectors,
     a Contract Discrepancy Report     subcontractors, or site
     (DD Form 2772) if necessary)      workers.
                                                                            65
                                                                       Appendix I

                                         OTHER AREAS TO BE MONITORED -- CHECKLIST (cont’d)

l.   CDR Management – COR              SO will work with COR      As required       All      (insert correct
     should continuously monitor       and Government                                      reference(s) to be
     the status of all open/ongoing    representatives to                                   consistent with
     Contractor Deficiency Reports     resolve each CDR as                                  actual contract)
     (CDRs), DD Form 2772.             quickly and effectively
                                       as possible.
     COR should maintain
     communication with KO and
     SO on all open/ongoing CDRs
     through their resolution.

m.   COR Accessibility (End of         The SO will prepare        As required       All   All Contract Sections
     the Fiscal Year) – COR            necessary
     ensures their availability/       documents/information,                                (insert correct
     accessibility during the last     as needed, to assist in                             reference(s) to be
     two weeks of the fiscal year in   the execution of                                     consistent with
     order to assist the KO in the     contract-related end-of-                             actual contract)
     processing of end-of-year         year actions.
     contracting actions (i.e.
     modifications, etc.). This is
     required to address any year-
     end developments that may
     occur, such as availability of
     project funding.




                                                                            66
