JOSH GREEN, M.D.                                                                        SHARON HURD
    Governor                                                                              Chairperson
                                                                                Board of Agriculture & Biosecurity
  SYLVIA LUKE
   Lt. Governor                                                                    DEAN M. MATSUKAWA
                                                                                   Deputy to the Chairperson
                                               State of Hawai'i
                              DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & BIOSECURITY
                                    KA 'OIHANA MAHl'AI A KIA'I MEAOLA
                                           1428 South King Street
                                        Honolulu, Hawai'i 96814-2512
                                 Phone: (808) 973-9560 FAX: (808) 973-9613



                                            May 8, 2026                         05/12/2026
                                                                                       9:13 am
                                                                                 STATE OF HAWAII
   Mr. Dan Orodenker                                                          LAND USE COMMISSION
   Executive Officer
   Land Use Commission
   235 South Beretania Street, Suite 406
   Honolulu, Hawaii 96813

   Dear Mr. Orodenker:

   Subject:        Special Permit Application (SP-2026-4)
                   Kaawanui Solar Project         •
                   Kaawanui Solar, LLC
                   Robinson Family Partners (lessee: Gay & Robinson, Inc.)
                   TMK: (4) 1-7-006: 006 (por.) and 010 (por.)
                   Area: 269.195 acres
                   Makaweli, Kauai

   The Department of Agriculture and Biosecurity (Department) has reviewed the subject
   application (as comprised in Exhibit 25 of the Land Use Commission's List of Exhibits)
   and offers the following comments and recommendations.

   Background
   Kaawanui Solar/AES Clean Energy Development Company (Applicant) is proposing the
   development of a 52-megawatt (DC) capacity photovoltaic solar energy facility, a 172
   megawatt-hour battery storage system, and related appurtenances at the 269.195-acre
   project site located about 2 miles southeast of Waimea town. The project site's
   southwestern boundary runs along Kaumualii Highway, and the northeastern boundary
   abuts Kaawanui village.

   The project site is entirely within the State Agricultural District, the County General Plan
   designation is Agricultural, and County zoning is Agricultural with some Open Space
   along Kaawanui Gulch situated along the southeastern boundary of the project site.
   The 20,888 acres of designated Important Agricultural Land (Robinson Family Partners)
   touches the northeastern tip of the project site (Application, Exhibit C, Project Figures,
   C10, page C-10 or electronic document page 280).
Mr. Dan Orodenker
May 8, 2026
Page 2

Historic use of the project site was irrigated sugarcane, followed by livestock pasture,
then the grazing of cattle, sheep, and water buffalo. The "2020 Update to the Hawaii
Statewide Agricultural Land Use Baseline" confirms that pasture was, at the time of the
Update, the predominant use (Kauai Island Crop Summary, page 9). Seed corn
production occupied agricultural lands at some distance to the west and east of the
project site.

Soil index classifications
The entire project site has an Overall Productivity Rating of "B" and Land Type of "50i"
according to the Land Study Bureau's (LSB) "Detailed Land Classification - Island of
Kauai" (L.S.B. Bulletin No. 9; December 1967; page 28). The LSB rating and Land
Type indicate this soil has moderate tillability and very good productivity potential for
most agricultural uses.

The project site is classified entirely as "Prime" agricultural land according to the
Agricultural Lands of Importance to the State of Hawaii. "Prime" indicates land best
suited for the production of food, feed, forage and fiber crops and having the soil quality,
growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields of crops
economically when treated and managed, including water management, according to
modern farming methods (Application, Exhibit C, Project Figures, C16, page C-18 or
electronic document page 288).

Water resources
The Application (Section 6.6.1, page 6-12 and Exhibit I, Compatible Agriculture Plan,
page 8 or electronic document page 395) states that the project has an annual water
allocation from Gay & Robinson from an existing irrigation ditch system for compatible
agricultural activities, landscaping, and facility use during construction and operation.
The amount of water to be allocated is unstated. AES will cover the costs to reroute the
existing irrigation infrastructure to accommodate the solar energy facility and the
agricultural entity. Doing so should provide animals and crops with a reliable source and
sufficient amount of drinking and irrigation water to ensure optimal growth.

Solar panel array
It appears that the compatible agricultural activities will be concentrated in the "central
array" which comprises about 62.8 acres (23%) of the 269-acre project site. According
to the Compatible Agriculture Plan (Application, Exhibit I, electronic document pages
387-398) the layout of the solar panels "provides a 12-foot-wide workable agricultural
corridor" between rows of panels and that "will allow the agricultural partner to consider
not only rotational grazing of livestock in this area of the Project but also planted crops
with opportunity for mechanical planting and harvesting, a form of agricultural
management that is rarely available within solar projects." (emphasis added) The
maximum crop height in the central array will be about 3. 78 feet and will accommodate
livestock as tall as 4.56 feet. An adult sheep standing height from the ground to the
apex of the head ranges between 3.08 feet to 4.58 feet.
Mr. Dan Orodenker
May 8, 2026
Page 3

The solar panels in the 148 acres surrounding the central array will be the "minimum
space possible while maintaining the required maintenance clearances ... Potential
agricultural uses in these areas are somewhat more size-constrained, with a 6-foot-wide
by 3.40-foot-high workable space." (Ibid., electronic document page 394).

Perimeter fencing will be erected around each of the six solar panel array areas
(Application, Exhibit E, Site Development Plan Set, Sheet 1, or electronic document
page 314) This fencing is important for livestock control.

Compatible Agriculture Plan
(Application, Exhibits, Exhibit I, electronic document pages 387-398)
The unique layout of the solar panels described in the previous section "allows
rotational grazing of livestock" as well as "planted crops with opportunity for mechanical
planting and harvesting" within the 62.8-acre central array (Ibid., electronic document
page 392)

Kawailani, Inc., a branch of the Gay & Robinson family, will be the agricultural partner
for the solar energy facility. They have experience with cattle and sheep. Their herd
plan starts with 100 sheep, and they anticipate a total herd of about 537 head by the
end of the 5th year of the plan, with 153 head available for market (Ibid., electronic
document page 396).

Kawailani "has access to nearby slaughter facilities and sales channels, enabling it to
market to local eateries and supermarkets, as well as to consumers directly." (Ibid, page
9 or electronic document page 396) While sales of sheep/lamb is not required by State
law (Section 205-4.5(21 ), HRS), it is the generation of revenue by agricultural operators
selling their agricultural products such as livestock as well as vegetables, melons, fruits,
honey, and so forth that will ensure continued agricultural activity. The Department
encourages Kawailani to formalize "access to nearby slaughter facilities and sales
channels" as this will provide the foundation for other proposed agricultural activities
within the solar energy facility.

After the sheep operation is in full operation and income from sheep sales, Kawailani
will use income from sheep sales to offset the costs to establish a proposed chicken
and egg production operation using mobile chicken coops moving between the rows in
the 62.8-acre central array (Ibid., page 10 or electronic document page 397).

Thereafter, Kawailani envisions planting crops throughout the project site (Ibid., page 10
or electronic document page 397) including leafy greens, dry-land taro and asparagus.
AES has partnered with the Hawaii Agricultural Research Center (HARC) and Robinson
Family Partners have previously worked with HARC on "agrivoltaic" agriculture. If
available, this information and data may help in the selection of optimal crop varieties
and appropriate cultivation practices.

Compatible Agriculture Plan Feasibility Assessment
Mr. Dan Orodenker
May 8, 2026
Page4

(Application, Exhibits, Exhibit J, electronic document pages 401-403)
According to this document, "Kaawanui has a distinct advantage in that the Robinson's
currently operate a slaughterhouse and have marketing agreements in place."

Conclusion
In summary, based on the information provided in the Application, the Department of
Agriculture and Biosecurity is optimistic that "compatible agricultural activity" will occur
within the area occupied by the proposed solar energy facility and the agricultural
products raised and grown there will be available to Hawaii's markets and food service
businesses.

                                           Sincerely,



                                           Sharon Hurd, Chairperson
                                           Board of Agriculture and Biosecurity



c:     Mr. Leo Asuncion, Administrator
       Land Use Division
       Office of Planning and Sustainable Development
       leodoloff.r.asuncion@hawaii.gov

       Mr. Kenneth Estes
       Department of Planning
       County of kauai
       kestes@kauai.gov


Kaawanui Solar Project - Makaweli Kauai, 269 acres, May 2026 LUC
