                                                                                      05/04/2026
                                                                                         10:00 am
                                BEFORE THE PLANNING COMMISSION                       STATE OF HAWAII
                                                                                  LAND USE COMMISSION
                                             OF THE

                                       COUNTY OF KAUA'I

In The Matter Of The Application               )   USE PERMIT NO. U-2026-9
                                               )   CLASS IV ZONING PERMIT
                 Of                            )   NO. Z-IV-2026-12
                                               )   SPECIAL PERMIT NO. SP-2026-4
KAAWANUI SOLAR, LLC, a Delaware                )
limited liability company, for a Use Permit, )
a Class IV Zoning Permit, and a Special        )   FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS
Permit for real property situated at Makaweli, )   OF LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER
Waimea, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, identified by         )
Kaua'i Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006        )
(por.) and 010 (por.).                         )   (KAAWANUI PROJECT)
                                               )
_____________________________________ )


     FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER


                  The County of Kaua'i Planning Commission ("Planning Commission"), having

examined the complete record of proceedings on State Special Use Permit ("SUP") Application

SP-2026-4, Use Permit U-2026-9, and Class IV Zoning Permit Z-IV-2026-12 (hereinafter

collectively referred to as the "Application") filed by Kaawanui Solar, LLC ("Applicant"), to

construct a solar energy facility and accessory uses and structures (referred to herein as the

"Project", the "Solar Project", or the "facility") on approximately 269.195 acres of land in the

State Land Use Agricultural District identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006 (por.)

and (4) 1-7-006:010 (por.) in Makaweli, Kaua'i, Hawai'i (referred to herein as the "Project Site"

or the "Petition Area"), and upon consideration of the matters discussed therein, at its meeting on

March 10, 2026, hereby makes the following findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision

and order:


4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                                         FINDINGS OF FACT

PROCEDURAL MATTERS

                  1.        By letter dated January 5, 2026, the Applicant filed the Application,

together with a Standard Zoning Permit Application, General Class III and IV Requirement

Checklist, Process Election Form, Checklist of State Special Permit Application Requirements,

Authorizations of Applicant, Owner and Lessee, Kaawanui Solar Project Report with digital

version (CD-rom), and all required fees with Ka'āina S. Hull, Planning Director, Planning

Department, County of Kaua'i.

                  2.        By letter dated January 13, 2026, the Planning Director found the

Application to be complete effective January 12, 2026, and began processing the Application

pursuant to Section 8-3.1 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance ("CZO") as contained in

Title IV, Chapter 8 of the Kauai County Code, 1987.

                  3.        By Notice of Public Hearing published in The Garden Island newspaper, a

newspaper of general circulation in the County of Kauai, the Planning Director provided

notice to the public that the agency hearing with a public hearing and an opportunity for public

testimony would be held on the Application on March 10, 2026, at 9:00 a.m. or shortly

thereafter, at the Līhu'e Civic Center, Moikeha Building, Meeting Room 2A-2B,

4444 Rice Street, Līhu'e, Kaua'i, Hawai'i.

                  4.        On February 6, 2026, the Applicant mailed a Notice of Public Hearing

pursuant to CZO Section 8-3.1(f), Section 1-13-5(d) of the Rules Of Practice And Procedure Of

The Planning Commission Of The County Of Kauai ("P.C. Rules") to 85% of owners of parcels

located within 300 feet of Parcels 6 and 10.




                                                   -2-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  5.        On February 6, 2026, the Applicant mailed an Affidavit As To Mailing Of

Notice to the Planning Director in compliance with CZO Section 8-3.1(f), the receipt of which

was acknowledged by the Planning Department on February 9, 2026.

                  6.        At its February 24, 2026, meeting, the Planning Commission received

the Planning Director's Report on the Application prepared in compliance with CZO

Section 8-3.1(f)(3).

                  7.        At its March 10, 2026, meeting the Planning Commission opened and

closed the Public Hearing on the Application.

                  8.        At its March 10, 2026, meeting, the Planning Commission opened and

closed the Agency Hearing on the Application.

                  9.        At its March 10, 2026, meeting, the Planning Commission approved, by a

vote of a majority of the members of the Planning Commission, Use Permit No. U-2026-9 and

Class IV Zoning Permit No. Z-IV-2026-12, and recommended approval of Special Permit

No. SP-2026-4 to the State Land Use Commission ("SLUC"), subject to the twenty-four (24)

conditions of approval contained in the Decision And Order.

EVIDENTIARY MATTERS

                  10.       The Planning Commission has received, taken judicial notice of, and

otherwise designated, the following documents as constituting the complete record in this matter:

                            a.      The Planning Department's file in this matter.

                            b.      All Public Witness testimony and written submissions.

                            c.      The Application.

                            d.      The G70 Report For AES (January 2026) ("G70 Report")

and Exhibits.

                                                       -3-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            e.      All testimony of witnesses at the Agency Hearing.

                            f.      The transcripts of all proceedings before the Planning Commission

prepared by iDepo Hawaii, LLC.

                            g.      The Exhibits listed in Applicant's Exhibit List.

                            h.      The Kaawanui Solar+Storage Power Point and digital version

(CD-Rom).

                            i.      The digital version (CD-Rom) and the ADA compliant digital

version (CD-Rom) of the G70 Report.

APPLICANT/PROJECT SITE/OWNER

                  11.       Applicant. The Applicant is Kaawanui Solar, LLC, a Delaware limited

liability company. The Applicant has authorized Max W. J. Graham, Jr., Michael J. Belles,

and Ian K. Jung of Belles Graham LLP, and Benjamin M. Matsubara and Curtis T. Tabata of

Matsubara Kotake & Tabata to file this Application pursuant to the Applicant Authorization.

                  12.       AES. The Applicant is an affiliate of AES Clean Energy Development

Company, LLC which is a subsidiary of The AES Corporation. The AES Corporation has a long

history in the development and operation of solar powered electric facilities, battery energy

storage systems and other renewable and conventional power generation facilities. The AES

Corporation is a Fortune 500 global power company with over 37,000 MW of generating

capacity, seven utility companies, and 19,000 employees in 17 countries.

                  13.       Project Site. Robinson Family Partners ("RFP") owns the Project Site,

which is located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key Nos.

(4) 1-7-006:006 ("Parcel 6") and (4) 1-7-006:010 ("Parcel 10"). RFP leases the Project Site to

Gay & Robinson, Inc., a Hawai'i corporation ("G&R").

                                                     -4-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  14.       Project Description. The Applicant proposes to develop the Project within

Parcels 6 and 10. The Project will be a photovoltaic solar energy facility on an approximately

269.195 acre portion of Parcels 6 and 10, and will include the following improvements

("Project Improvements"): a solar photovoltaic (PV) system with solar panels and racking

system; power conversion stations; a Battery Energy Storage System ("BESS"); a network of

electrical collector lines; communications equipment; an Operations & Maintenance Shed; an

AES Hawai'i Substation; a Kaawanui Substation and interconnection lines (which will be

transferred to KIUC); fencing; and access roads. RFP and G&R have agreed to grant the

Applicant an option to acquire an easement ("Project Easement") to use: the portions of the

Project Site other than the common roads on an exclusive basis to develop and operate the

Project; and the common roads within the Project Site on a non-exclusive basis for access and

utility purposes.

                  15.       Authorization.   RFP has authorized Applicant to file this Application

pursuant to the Landowner Authorization.            G&R has authorized the Applicant to file this

Application pursuant to the Lessee Authorization.

LOCATION AND LAND USE DESIGNATIONS OF PROPERTY

                  16.       Location. The Project Site is located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kaua'i,

Hawai'i. The Project Site is located in the ahupua'a of Makaweli.

                  17.       SLUC. The Project Site is located in the SLUC Agricultural District.

                  18.       Kaua'i General Plan. The Project Site is subject to the provisions of the

Kaua'i Kā Kou (Kaua'i County General Plan) ("Kaua'i General Plan").




                                                    -5-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  19.       CZO. The Project Site is located primarily in the CZO Agriculture

District, although a small portion of the Project Site along its southern side (along the

Kaawanui Gulch) is also located in the CZO Open District.

                  20.       Development Plan Area. The Project Site is located within the West

Kaua'i Community Plan ("WKCP") Area. The Project Site has been designated Agriculture on

the WKCP Regional Map.

                  21.       CZMA/Special Management Area.         As set forth in Hawai'i Revised

Statutes ("HRS") Chapter 205A (Part I), all lands in the State of Hawai'i, including the Project

Site, are located in the Coastal Zone Management Area ("CZMA") and are subject to the

objectives and policies of the Coastal Zone Management Program ("CZMP"), as described in

HRS Section 205A-2. None of the Project Site is located within the Special Management Area

("SMA") of the County of Kaua'i.

                  22.       Violations. There are no existing violations of any land use laws or

regulations on the Project Site.

                  23.       Land Use Conditions.          RFP is in the process of purchasing

Old Government Road A from the State of Hawai'i, a portion of which (the "Road A Section") is

located within the Project Site. The sale is subject to a condition requiring the Road A Section to

be consolidated into Parcel 10. The Project Site is not subject to any other land use conditions.

                  24.       Important Agricultural Lands. The Project Site has not been designated as

Important Agricultural Lands ("IAL") pursuant to HRS Chapter 205, Part III.

PAST, EXISTING AND PROPOSED USES OF PROJECT SITE

                  25.       Past and Existing Uses. In the past the Project Site has been used for

agricultural purposes, including sugar cane cultivation, and for cattle and livestock pasture

                                                    -6-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
purposes. The Project Site has been used most recently for the grazing of cattle, sheep, and water

buffalo within fenced pens.

                  26.       Proposed Project. The Applicant is proposing to develop the Project on

the Project Site.

                  27.       Solar PV System/Power Conversion/Electrical Collection. The Project will

be located on the Project Site as shown on the Site Development Plan Set. It will consist of an

approximately 52 megawatt Direct Current (MW DC)/43 megawatt Alternating Current

(MW AC) ground mounted solar photo-voltaic ("PV") system, coupled with a 172 MWh Battery

Energy Storage System (BESS), and related interconnection and ancillary facilities. The Project

will consist of solar panels mounted on single-axis trackers, which will rotate along a fixed

horizontal axis from east to west as the sun moves across the sky, increasing the efficiency of the

system as opposed to a traditional fixed-tilt system. The solar panels, racking system, and other

equipment. The Project will include solar panels, which will produce direct current electricity.

The output of the solar panels will be directed to central inverters, which will convert the

electricity from direct current to alternating current. The inverters will be connected to step-up

transformers to convert the inverter output to medium voltage.

                  28.       Substations. All of the power generated by the Project will be directed to

a new substation ("AES Hawai'i Substation") and then to the BESS or the Kaawanui Substation.

The BESS will be located adjacent to the AES Hawai'i Substation and be used to store the

electrical power. A generator step-up transformer will convert the medium voltage to

transmission voltage to interconnect with the adjacent Kaawanui Substation. The Kaawanui

Substation will be constructed by the Applicant at the same time as the Project, and will be

located on an approximately two (2) acre portion of Parcel 10. The AES Hawai'i Substation will

                                                    -7-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
be located immediately adjacent to the Kaawanui Substation and will be connected via an

underground line. Upon completion of construction, the Applicant will transfer the Kaawanui

Substation to KIUC, and RFP will convey an easement over the Kaawanui Substation portion of

Parcel 10 to KIUC.

                  29.       Utility Poles/Lines.   Shield wire metal masts will be installed in the

AES Hawai'i Substation (45 feet tall) and the Kaawanui Substation (60-70 feet tall) to protect

equipment. The Kaawanui Substation will be connected to the main KIUC grid on Kaumuali'i

Highway through interconnection lines located on steel poles (60-70 feet tall).

                  30.       Support Facilities.    The Project will include the following support

facilities.

                  31.       Operations and Maintenance Shed. An Operation and Maintenance Shed

("O&M Shed") will be constructed adjacent to the AES Hawai'i Substation. It will be a twelve

(12)-foot-high building measuring 20 feet by 42 feet and will be used for office purposes, remote

site monitoring, equipment, and storage. The shed will use electricity from the station service line

for climate control and lighting. Lavatories for the shed will either be connected through private

domestic water connections and a septic tank or serviced by specialized sanitation crews who will

manage waste and water tanks and perform routine maintenance.

                  32.       Communication Equipment. Additional communication connections and

equipment will be installed to interface with KIUC's supervisory control and data acquisition

("SCADA") system so that the energy generated by the Project can be remotely controlled and

dispatched by KIUC. The Project will include an energy management system ("EMS") that will:

allow all operations to be supervised and all system functions to be protected in response to real-




                                                    -8-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
time dispatch signals from KIUC; and will report production data, energy forecasts, and other

system health data.

                  33.       Fencing/Roads. The Project Site will be surrounded by seven (7) foot

high chain link security fence. There will be a buffer around the outside of the security fence,

and there will be access roads (including the Common Roads) throughout the Project Site, which

will allow for convenient access and navigation within the Project Site to all major equipment.

                  34.       General Dimensions. The Project Improvements will have the following

dimensions.

                  35.       Solar Panels. The proposed ground mounted solar panels will be on a

single-axis tracking system, which will tilt the panels along a horizontal axis to follow the sun as

it moves across the sky from east to west. The average height of the Solar Panels will be five (5)

feet off the ground at a stow position where the panels are flat. As they rotate, their highest point

will reach eight (8) feet high. Given the height of the panels, there will be room for people to

move under and around the system with ease.

                  36.       BESS. The BESS Containers will be ten (10) feet in height, eight (8) feet

in width, and twenty (20) feet in length. The BESS Containers will include the lithium-ion

battery modules. In addition, each BESS Container will have several layers of protection to

avoid failures and to contain hazards in the event of a failure. There will be forty-four (44)

BESS Containers located adjacent to the AES Hawai'i Substation.

                  37.       Development/Construction.     AES estimates it may take from 6 to

18 months after approval of this Application by the Planning Commission and SLUC to finalize

engineering and design and obtain necessary ministerial permits. Thereafter, actual construction




                                                    -9-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
is estimated to take 16 to 24 months, with final Testing to take 8 to 12 months. The target

commercial operating date is estimated to be in 2028.

                  38.       Plans. The Applicant will develop a Health, Safety and Security Plan, an

Environmental Compliance Plan, and an Emergency Response Plan.

                  39.       Staging Area. The Project Site will be grubbed and graded as necessary.

During construction, approximately nine (9) acres within the Project Site will be utilized for one

or more Staging Areas.

                  40.       Delivery of Materials.     The Project materials and equipment will be

delivered to the Project Site and held in the Staging Areas.

                  41.       Construction. The Project will be constructed.

                  42.       BMPs. Following construction, all disturbed areas will be re-vegetated

and where necessary protected by Best Management Practices ("BMPs").

                  43.       Land Coverage.     Pursuant to CZO Sections 8-8.2(a) and 8-4.3, the

allowable land coverage in the CZO Agriculture District is 60% of lot or parcel area and

the allowable land coverage in the CZO is 10% of lot or parcel area. The solar panels will

be elevated on structural posts, minimizing new impervious area. The proposed development

will add approximately nine and 842/1000 (9.842) acres of new impervious surface on Parcel 10

and on Parcel 6. The Parcel 10 Project Improvements will consist of the solar panel mounting

posts, the AES Hawai'i Substation, the Kaawanui Substation, the O&M Shed, transformer pads,

BESS Blocks, inverters, transformers, and fence posts. The Parcel 6 Project Improvements will

include the solar panel mounting posts, transformer pads, and fence posts. The allowable land

coverage in Parcel 10 is 95.25 acres, and the allowable land coverage in Parcel 6 is 2,908.794

acres. As a result, the allowable land coverage on the Project Site will not be exceeded.

                                                     -10-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  44.       Landscaping. Because of the existing vegetative screening adjacent to

Kaumuali'i Highway and elsewhere on the Project Site, the Project will only be partially visible

from Kaumuali'i Highway. The Applicant will preserve this existing vegetation. In addition, to

further mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping will be installed and maintained around the

Project Site.

                  45.       Compatible Agriculture. HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21) allows solar energy

facilities on lands with overall (master) productivity rating B (as is the case of the Project Site)

provided that, among other things, the area occupied by the solar project is also made available

for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least 50% below the fair market rent

for comparable lands. As described in the Compatible Agricultural Plan, the Applicant proposes

to make the Project Site available for sheep grazing, poultry production, and eventually crop

production. The agricultural operator will be Kawailana, Inc. The Applicant will not charge

Kawailana, Inc. rent for the use of the Project Site.

                  46.       Operation. After construction and commissioning, the system will operate

with minimal servicing and maintenance.

                  47.       Monitoring. The Applicant will have 3 to 4 employees on site on a daily

basis.     In addition, metering equipment will send performance and production data to

continuously monitored servers.           The Applicant's software will notify its Operations &

Maintenance team if the system is underperforming.             The Applicant will have dedicated

employees monitoring the Project twenty-four (24) hours per day seven (7) days per week,

including an operator on island.




                                                   -11-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  48.       Noise. During operation, the solar panels will be silent. As discussed

herein in Section 6.3, the BESS , inverter,s and transformers are also very quiet, emitting less

than thirty-eight (38) a-weighted decibels (dBA) at 100 meters, which is approximately the

loudness of a conversation.

                  49.       Lighting. Permanent lighting may be required for the Project for site

security. Any onsite lighting will be motion sensor-activated as well as angled downward and

shielded to avoid excess light or glare beyond the Project Site boundary.             All lighting

requirements will be met by using LED lights.

                  50.       Emergency Response Plan. The Applicant will implement an Emergency

Response and Communication Plan to address emergency situations that may arise at the

Project Site.

                  51.       Decommissioning. Following the life and operation of the Project under

the Project GOE, the Applicant will remove the solar energy facility which includes the

following: (1) solar panels and racking system, including steel posts, (2) power conversion

stations (3) BESSs, including battery units and battery modules, inverters and transformers, and

other auxiliary equipment (4) AES Hawaiʻi Substation and related components including

communication, operations, and security equipment, (5) electrical wiring and connections, and

(6) fencing and gates. The Applicant will cover up all pit holes, trenches, other borings, or

excavations; reseed the soil with appropriate grass seed if necessary; and will otherwise return

the land to substantially the same condition as its original condition. The Applicant will provide

proof of financial security to decommission the facility as required by HRS §205-4.5(a)(21).




                                                  -12-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  52.       Grid Stability. The proposed Project will provide approximately 17.5% of

KIUC's total electric generation. One of its key benefits will be to improve electric grid stability

by enabling KIUC to utilize stored solar energy from the BESS to be dispatched at any time

KIUC desires.         This will help KIUC to meet its evening peak demand, along with other

supporting ancillary services on the grid. KIUC intends to use the stored energy in the BESS

system to: (1) provide energy as the sun sets and into the evening to offset KIUC's evening peak

demand; (2) provide energy in the morning to offset KIUC's morning peak; and (3) respond to

low-frequency events by supplying additional power automatically, all of which will help KIUC

reduce its dependence on more expensive and inefficient conventional oil-fired units. It is

anticipated the Project will reduce KIUC's fossil fuel usage by over 179 million gallons over the

25-year PPA term.

                  53.       Green Energy. The Project will also provide benefits to human health and

environment through the use of an alternative "green" energy source that does not generate

greenhouse gases and does not result in water contamination or other environmental impacts

often associated with fossil fuel production. KIUC and its members/customers will use

approximately 7,150,000 fewer gallons of oil annually. The amount of clean renewable green

energy expected to be generated from the Project per year is enough to power almost 16,000

homes.      The energy generated will also assist KIUC in achieving the State of Hawai'i's

Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), as set forth in HRS §269-91 et seq.           and its own more

ambitious goal of 100% renewable RPS by2033.

                  54.       Public Benefits. The construction and maintenance of the system will

benefit the public as a whole and support the local economy by: increasing tax revenues;




                                                   -13-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
providing jobs; and increasing the sale of local goods and services. The Project will deliver power

at a low, fixed price over its 25-year lifespan at a cheaper cost than current fossil fuel prices.

                  55.       Federal Solar Tax Credit. Between July 2024, when the Applicant bid this

Project to KIUC, and December 2025, federal legislation and rulemaking have created an

unprecedented urgency to bring solar projects online. Under current rules, the Applicant must

place the Project into service no later than December 31, 2029, to qualify for the federal solar tax

credits assumed in the PPA price negotiated with KIUC. These federal tax credits allow the

Applicant to sell energy to KIUC at a lower rate, which KIUC can then pass along to its

members. The Project schedule currently targets commercial operation in 2028, but any

permitting delay could have compounding effects on the Project schedule and jeopardize

obtaining the federal tax credits.

                  56.       PPA. The Applicant and KIUC have entered into a Power Purchase

Agreement, which is awaiting approval by the Hawai'i Public Utilities Commission ("PUC"). By

its terms, KIUC will purchase the electrical power generated by the Project for a minimum of

twenty-five (25) year period.

                  57.       GOE/Option. RFP and AES have executed an Option Agreement that

provides AES the right to enter into a Grant of Easement Agreement (the "Project GOE")

covering the Project Site. The Project GOE will grant AES: a Construction Term of three (3)

years and two (2) extensions of the Construction Term for six (6) months each to construct the

Project; an initial Operating Term of 25 years; and three (3) extensions of the Operating Term of

five (5) years each. The total term of the Project GOE will be forty-four (44) years.. The

Applicant will exercise the Option upon approval of the PPA by the PUC and upon approval of

all necessary discretionary and ministerial permits.


                                                   -14-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT SITE AND IDENTIFICATION OF SURROUNDING
LANDS

                  58.       Adjacent Property. Parcels 6 and 10 are located adjacent to, or within

300 feet of, the properties identified on the Adjacent Property Index.

                  59.       Natural Environment. The Project Site is composed of gently sloping

lands (4%) in an area generally lying east of Waimea Town, and north (mauka) of Kaumuali'i

Highway. The Project Site is located approximately 20 feet to 215 feet above sea level. The

Project Site is gentle sloping in a mauka to makai direction. The Project Site is currently used

for agricultural purposes. Most of the Project Site consists of open areas. The A'akuki Stream

and Kekupua Valley run along the northern boundary of the Project Site. The Kaawanui Gulch

runs along the southern boundary of the Project Site.

                  60.       Soils/Survey Map.    According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture

("USDA") Soil Survey Geographic ("SSURGO") database (2001) and soil survey data gathered

by Foote et al. (1972), the soils in the Project Site consist of:

                            a.      Makaweli stony silty clay loam (0-6%) (MhB).

                            b.      Makaweli stony silty clay loam (6-12% slope) (MhC).

                            c.      Makaweli stony silty clay loam (0-6% slope) (MgB).

                            d.      Nonopahu clay (2-10% slope) (NnC).

                            e.      Rough broken land (rRR).

                            f.      Dune land (DL).

                  61.       Land Study Bureau. Lands in Hawai'i have been classified in a five-class

productivity rating system using the Letters A, B, C, D and E where A represents the class of

highest productivity and E the lowest. As shown on the Detailed Land Classification Map



                                                      -15-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
(Island of Kaua'i) (Land Study Bureau, University of Hawai'i), the Over-all Productivity Rating

for most of the lands within the Project Site is Class B. The Project Site is also designated as

Agricultural Lands Important to the State of Hawai'i ("ALISH").

                  62.       Rainfall. The Project Site receives approximately 21 inches of

annual rainfall.

                  63.       Biological Resources. AECOS Inc. has prepared a Natural Resources

Assessment For The Proposed Kaawanui Project (October 30, 2025) which describes the

biological resources on the Project Site ("AECOS Report"). The AECOS Report has been

further supplemented by a Hawai'i Gap Analysis Project Land Cover And Vegetation Map.

                  64.       Jurisdictional Waters. None of the water features on the Project Site

(irrigation ditches, streams and gulches) are subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of

Engineers.

                  65.       Flora. The Project Site is pasture-land dominated by grasses. A total of

97 species of plants (including 6 indigenous and 3 early Polynesia species) were identified but

none are listed as threatened or endangered under state or federal law.

                  66.       Avian. A total of 25 species of birds were recorded in the avian survey,

of which one (Hawaiian duck) is a listed species under federal and state of Hawai'i endangered

species statutes. Two other species (Black-crowned Night Heron and Pacific Golden-Plover) are

native but not endangered or threatened. No suitable nesting habitats exist on the Project Site for

any endemic waterbirds. As a result, the proposed Project will not impact listed waterbird

species.




                                                   -16-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  67.       Mammalian. All other vertebrates observed are non-native. However, it

is possible that the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus semotus) uses resources in the area.

Adverse impacts to Hawaiian hoary bat can be avoided or minimized by not clearing woody

vegetation taller than 4.6 m (15 feet) between June 1 and September 15, the bat pupping season,

and by avoiding the use of barbed wire for project fencing, which the Project will implement

during construction and operations.

                  68.       Flood Hazard.      According to the Federal Insurance Rate Maps

(Map No. 1500020258G and Map No. 1500020259G), the Project Site is located in

Flood Zone X, which is an area determined to be outside of the 500-year flood plain.

                  69.       Water Resources. The Project will utilize an existing private, potable, and

agricultural water system for potable and agricultural water purposes. This use will have no

significant impact on Groundwater Resources. In addition, the Project will not withdraw water

from, and will have no impact on, any streams in the vicinity.

                  70.       Wildfire Hazard. The Applicant will incorporate multiple layers of fire

prevention and suppression measures to enhance the safety of the Project Site and adjacent lands.

PERMITS REQUESTED AND REQUIRED

                  71.       Use Permit. The construction of the Project will take place primarily

within the CZO Agriculture District, although a small portion will be located in the CZO Open

District.    For purposes of the CZO, the Project Improvements, including the AES Hawai'i

Substation (but not the Kaawanui Substation), constitute a "Solar Energy Facility". Conversely,

the Kaawanui Substation is defined as a "public utilities facility" under the CZO. In both cases,

however, they are uses that require a Use Permit for uses in the CZO Agriculture District

pursuant to CZO Sections 8-2.4(r)(22), (s)(16) and (s)(21) and in the CZO Open District

                                                    -17-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
pursuant to CZO Sections 8-2.4(u)(14) and (u)(15). Therefore, the Applicant has requested that

the Planning Commission issue a Use Permit pursuant to CZO Section 8-3.2 for the construction

of the Project (including the Kaawanui Substation). The Applicant filed a Standard Zoning

Permit Application in support of this Use Permit request.

                  72.       Class IV Zoning Permit. The Project (including the Kaawanui Substation)

requires the issuance of a Class IV Zoning Permit as a condition of the Use Permit approval

pursuant to CZO Section 8-8.4(4).          The Applicant filed a General Class III & IV Zoning

Requirement Checklist in support of this Class IV Zoning Permit request.

                  73.       Special Permit.    A SLUC Special Permit as described in HRS

Section 205-6 and Hawai'i Administrative Rules ("HAR") Title 15, Subtitle 3, Chapter 15,

Subchapter 12, is required pursuant to HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21) for the portions of the

proposed Project which are considered to be a "Solar Energy Facility". This would include all of

the Project Improvements, including the AES Hawai'i Substation, but not the Kaawanui

Substation. The Kaawanui Substation is a permitted use under HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(7),

which allows "Public…utility lines and roadways, transformer stations…or other similar

structures…", and is not subject to the Special Permit requirement. The Applicant filed a

Checklist of State Special Permit Application Requirements in support of this Special Permit

request.

IMPACTS OF DEVELOPMENT

                  74.       Botanical Resources and Wildlife. The existing state of botanical

resources and wildlife have been heavily compromised by past and present agricultural uses on

the Project Site. As a result, there do not appear to be any mammalian or avian species or

botanical resources that will be endangered by the Project.

                                                  -18-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  75.       Flora. The habitat currently present on the Project Site is comprised of

improved and unimproved lands which have been used for various agricultural purposes since

the closure of sugarcane operations in the area. The vegetation is dominated almost to the

exclusion of native species by alien introduced grasses and weedy species. Native taxa comprise

6 indigenous and 3 Early Polynesian ("canoe plants") species, representing only 9% of the total

plant species identified.

                  76.       Mammalian. Terrestrial mammals present on the Project Site and within

the vicinity are likewise alien species. There is the possibility that the endemic endangered

Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus semotus) overflies the Project Site and possibly forages

for insects on a seasonal basis above the Project Site.

                  77.       Avifauna. A total of 25 species of birds were recorded of which one

(the Hawaiian duck) is listed under federal and state of Hawai'i endangered species statutes.

Two other species (Black-crowned Night Heron and Pacific Golden-Plover) are native but not

endangered or threatened. No suitable nesting habitats exist on the Project Site for any endemic

waterbirds.      Four species, Rose-ringed Parakeet (Psittacula krameria), a Common Myna

(Acridotheric tristis), Common Waxbill (Estrilda astrild), and Red Junglefowl (Gallus gallus)

accounted for 51% of the total number of birds recorded during the field survey. The remaining

22 species recorded are all alien to the Hawaiian Islands. Eight of the species are protected

under the federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act. The avian diversity and densities observed during

the survey were consistent with the environment at the Project Site and with current usage at this

elevation range on the Island of Kaua'i. No seabirds were recorded during the surveys, but at

least two listed seabird species - Hawaiian Petrel (Pterodroma sandwichensis) and Newell's

Shearwater (Puffinus newelli) - may overfly the Project Site during the breeding season.

                                                   -19-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  78.       Historical Resources. The Project Site has been heavily disturbed by past

and present agricultural activities. As a result, with the exception of the post-contact Historic

Properties identified in the Reconnaissance Level Survey prepared by Mason Architects

(September 2025) ("Mason RLS"), the Archaeological Literature Review And Field Inspection

(Bautista, et.al., September 2025) ("LRFI"), and the Archaeological Inventory Survey Of

268.4 Acres For The Proposed Kaawanui Project (Hallett H. Hammatt, PhD, et.al./Cultural

Surveys Hawai'i, Inc./September 2025) ("AIS") (collectively, the "Archaeological Studies"),

there do not appear to be any pre-contact archaeological, cultural or historical resources on

the surface of the Project Site in which the Project will take place which will be affected by

the Project.

                  79.       Historic Properties.   The following historic properties were identified

in the AIS:

                            a.      SHPD# 50-30-09-02269 (historic plantation ditch system).

                            b.      SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-3 (historic Old Government Road).

                            c.      SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-4 (historic Kaawanui Village Road).

                            d.      SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-5 (historic Plantation Road).

                            e.      SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-6 (railroad track remnant).

                            f.      SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-7 (historic water tank facility).

                  80.       HICRIS.    The Project was initiated in the Hawai'i Cultural Resource

Information System ("HICRIS") on April 25, 2025, and assigned as Project Number

2025PR00506. In the event of an inadvertent discovery of a historic site or burial in the future,

the Applicant will immediately contact SHPD.




                                                    -20-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  81.       Air Quality/Noise. The Project will have little or no impact on the air

quality and ambient noise levels in the area. Air quality and ambient noise levels may be

affected at a very minimal level during the Project construction activities. All vehicles or

equipment used by the Applicant during construction will be properly muffled, housed, and

maintained to reduce any noise impacts or emission impacts. The Environmental Protection

Agency ("EPA") and State of Hawai'i air quality standards will not be exceeded.

                  82.       Flooding and Drainage. The Project Site is situated within Flood Zone X

(Areas outside of 500 year flood plain), as shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps 1500020259G

and 1500020267F.            The Project will meet all of the requirements of the Flood Plain

Management Ordinance of the County of Kaua'i, as contained in Chapter 15, Article 1, of the

Kaua'i County Code, 1987. The Project will have no impact on flooding on or around the Project

Site. All drainage resulting from the Project will be retained on site and subject to best

management practices.

                  83.       Water. The Project will obtain potable water and agricultural water from

an existing private water system located mauka of Kaumuali'i Highway. Use of this system will

have no significant impact on groundwater resources.

                  84.       Electric/Communications. Electricity and telecommunication services for

the Project will all be within the Project Site and either connect to existing service lines or be

delivered along the same route as the new Project Interconnection Line. The storage containers

will utilize electricity provided through the station service line for climate control and lighting,

and communication equipment will be installed in the AES Hawai‘i Substation and throughout

the facility for operations and security purposes. There will be no impacts associated with these

new connections.

                                                   -21-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  85.       Wastewater Treatment and Disposal. The County of Kaua‘i Public Works

– Wastewater Management Division operates Kaua‘i’s wastewater infrastructure, and the

wastewater system does not currently service the Project Site. Lavatories for the O&M shed will

either have a septic tank or be serviced by specialized sanitation crews who will manage waste

and water tanks and perform routine maintenance.

                  86.       Solid Waste Disposal. Solid waste collection will be provided by private

means.      During construction, all waste will be temporarily stored onsite and periodically

transported by the construction contractor for recycling or disposal at Kekaha Landfill. During

decommissioning, if necessary and as required, components that cannot be reused, salvaged,

recycled, or repurposed will be disposed of off-island at an authorized solid waste facility or

landfill. In total, the construction, operation, and decommissioning of the Project are not

expected to generate significant new demand for solid waste management services.

                  87.       Fire and Police Services.      Fire and police services in the vicinity

are located in Waimea, approximately 3.2 miles (Fire) and 3.6 miles (Police) from the Project

Site. The Project will not significantly increase the need for existing fire and police services.

                  88.       Schools. The closest schools are Eleele Elementary School in Eleele,

Waimea Canyon Middle School and Waimea High School in Waimea, and Kekaha Elementary

School, Kula Aupuni Niihau A Kahelelani Charter School, and Ke Kula Ni'ihau O Kekaha

Charter School in Kekaha. The Project will not generate any additional enrollment.

                  89.       Economics.    The Project will have the beneficial economic impacts

described in the Economic Impact Analysis.

                  90.       Housing.   The   Project    will   not   result   in   the   need   for   any

Workforce Housing units.

                                                   -22-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  91.       Property Values. Since the fair market value of real property is based on

the value of the land and physical improvements, the completion of the Project will increase the

value of the Project Site. This may result in increased real property taxes on the Project Site,

subject to any exemptions available for commercial alternative energy facilities contained in

Section 5A-11.30 of the Kauai County Code, 1987. However, it will not, in and of itself, have a

material impact on the value of, or real property taxes assessed against, surrounding properties.

                  92.       Population. The Project will not result in any significant increase in

population on Kaua'i.

                  93.       Traffic Circulation. The major roads which serve the Project Site are:

Kaumuali'i Highway (a State highway) to the southwest (makai); remnants of the

Kaua'i Belt Highway (a State road); and private, improved roads located within the Project Site.

As discussed in the Traffic Impact Analysis Report, the Project, in and of itself, will not

significantly increase traffic on Kaumuali'i Highway.

                  94.       Road Remnants. Located mauka of Kaumuali'i Highway, between

Hanapepe Town and the Waimea River, and surrounded by lands owned by RFP (including

certain Robinson Family Members), are two former highway remnants owned by the State of

Hawai'i. These remnants are identified as Old Government Road A and Old Government

Road B (the "Remnants"). A portion of Old Government Road A ("Road A Section") is located

between Parcel 6 and Parcel 10. RFP has agreed to buy, and the State of Hawai'i, through its

Department of Transportation ("HDOT"), has agreed to sell to RFP, the Remnants, including the

Road A Section. The Project GOE will provide Applicant with a non-exclusive easement for

access and utility purposes over the Road A Section, as well as the Road to Parcel 11 and

Kaʻawanui Village Road.

                                                   -23-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  95.       Heritage   Resources.   As     shown   on   the   West   Kaua'i   Heritage

Resource Map (Figure 5-9 of the Kaua'i General Plan) and as discussed in the View Study, there

are no historic resources noted within the Project Site. The proposed Project will be located on a

relatively level portion of the Project Site. With current and proposed screening vegetation, the

Project will be substantially screened from public roads.

                  96.       Airports. The Project Site is located approximately 3.7 miles from the

Port Allen Airport (a State facility) and 10.6 miles from the Barking Sands Airport (a U.S. Navy

facility). The Project Site is not located near or beneath any flight paths for these airports.

                  97.       FAA/Wildlife. The U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation

Administration ("FAA") has issued an Advisory Circular (ACNO: 150/5200-33b) entitled

Hazardous Wildlife Attractants On Or Near Airports. This Advisory Circular provides guidance

on certain land uses that have the potential to attract hazardous wildlife (avian species) within a

five (5) mile range of any airports (referred to as "Air Operation Areas" or "AOA"). Because the

Project is located within the five (5) mile range of the Port Allen airport, it is subject to

the Advisory Circular. The Applicant does not anticipate that the Project will attract any more

wildlife than is already present on the Project Site in its current condition. It should be noted that

"photovoltaic and solar farms" are not among the enumerated land-use practices in the

Advisory Circular that have the potential for attracting hazardous wildlife.

                  98.       OP TAM. As discussed in the Glare Hazard Analysis, the Project will

create minimal glare impacts. The State Office of Planning has issued Technical Assistance

Memorandum TAM-2016-1 ("TAM") pursuant to FAA Order 5190.6B. The TAM discusses the

State's obligation to restrict land uses adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of airports (which

have received federal funds) to activities and purposes compatible with normal airport

                                                    -24-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
operations. The TAM adopts the five (5) mile range (discussed above in the Advisory Circular)

in evaluating adjacent land uses. One of the concerns is the ocular impact (referred to as

"Glint/Glare") of solar panels on aircraft use, especially as solar facilities are being incorporated

into current airport operations. As discussed in the FAA Technical Guidance for Evaluating

Selected Solar Technologies On Airports (Report No. FAA-ARP-TR-10-1), the primary concern

is that light reflection (Glint/Glare) from solar facilities does not cause the temporary loss of

vision to pilots on arrival or departure from airports, or to Air Traffic Control personal in the

control tower.       This concern affects solar facilities located adjacent to or near the AOA

(i.e., within the 5 miles range) or within the flight paths for the airport.

                  99.       Glint/Glare. Because the Project is located within the 5 mile range of

the Port Allen airport, it will need to address Glint/Glare issues. As discussed in the Glare

Hazard Analysis, the Solar Panels which will be used for the Project are designed to minimize

reflection and maximize the absorption of light. The solar arrays will be mounted on solar

trackers which are aligned in a north to south direction and which move with the sun to

maximize absorption and minimize reflection. The Project will comply with all applicable

Glint/Glare requirements.

                  100.      Chemicals and Fertilizers.    A limited area (1.5-acre area) along the

southern boundary of the Project Site has been used for truck parking and miscellaneous farm

equipment storage. Based on the types of farm equipment and the Project Site's historical use,

combined with inspections of several containers, it is reasonably believed that these containers

currently or formerly held hazardous substances, including petroleum products. The drums that

did have labels were typically labeled “used oil”. All miscellaneous farming equipment currently

stored at the Project Site will be removed before construction begins.

                                                   -25-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
SLUC CONSIDERATIONS

                  101.      SLUC Agricultural District. The area of the Project Site in which the Project

will occur is located within the SLUC Agricultural District.                     Permitted uses in the

SLUC Agricultural District are set forth in HRS Sections 205-2 and 205-4.5(a), which provide in

relevant part as follows:

                            "§205-2. Districting and classification of lands.
                                                           . . .
                               (d) Agricultural districts shall include:
                                                           . . .
                                   (6)    Solar energy facilities; provided that:

                                            (A)    This paragraph shall apply only to
                                                   land with soil classified by the land
                                                   study     bureau's    detailed    land
                                                   classification as overall (master)
                                                   productivity rating class B, C, D or
                                                   E; and
                                            (B)    Solar energy facilities placed within
                                                   land with soil classified as overall
                                                   productivity rating class B or C shall
                                                   not occupy more than ten per cent of
                                                   the acreage of the parcel, or twenty
                                                   acres of land, whichever is lesser,
                                                   unless a special use permit is granted
                                                   pursuant to Section 205-6;"

                            "§205-4.5     Permissible uses within the agricultural
                            districts.

                                (a) Within the agricultural district all lands with soil
                            classified by the land study bureau's detailed land
                            classification as overall (master) productivity rating class A
                            or B, and for solar energy facilities, class B or C shall be
                            restricted to the following permitted uses:
                                                          . . .
                                     (7)     Public, private, and quasi-public utility lines
                            and roadways, transformer stations, communications
                            equipment buildings, solid waste transfer stations, major
                            water storage tanks, and appurtenant small buildings such

                                                     -26-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            as booster pumping stations, but not including offices or
                            yards for equipment, material, vehicle storage, repair or
                            maintenance, or treatment plants, or corporation yards, or
                            other like structures;
                                                      . . .

                                    (21) Solar energy facilities on lands with soil
                            classified by the land study bureau's detailed land
                            classification as overall (master) productivity rating B or C
                            for which a special use permit is granted pursuant to
                            Section 205-6; provided that:

                                           (A)      The area occupied by the solar
                            energy facilities is also made available for compatible
                            agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty
                            per cent below the fair market rent for comparable
                            properties;

                                           (B)   Proof of financial security to
                            decommission the facility is provided to the satisfaction of
                            the appropriate county planning commission prior to date
                            of commencement of commercial generation; and

                                          (C)    Solar energy facilities shall be
                            decommissioned at the owner's expense according to the
                            following requirements:

                                                   (i)      Removal of all equipment
                                                            related to the solar energy
                                                            facility within twelve months
                                                            of the conclusion of operation
                                                            or useful life; and
                                                   (ii)     Restoration of the disturbed
                                                            earth to substantially the
                                                            same physical condition as
                                                            existed      prior   to    the
                                                            development of the solar
                                                            energy facility."

                  102.      Special Permit. The requirements for the issuance of a Special Permit are

contained in HRS Section 205-6, which provides in relevant part as follows:




                                                     -27-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                                    "§205-6 Special Permit. (a) Subject to this section,
                            the county planning commission may permit certain unusual
                            and reasonable uses within agricultural and rural districts
                            other than those for which the district is classified. Any
                            person who desires to use the person's land within an
                            agricultural or rural district other than for an agricultural or
                            rural use, as the case may be, may petition the planning
                            commission of the county within which the person's land is
                            located for permission to use the person's land in the manner
                            desired...Copies of the special permit petition shall be
                            forwarded to the land use commission, the office of planning,
                            and the department of agriculture for their review and
                            comment.
                                                           . . .

                                    (c)     The county planning commission may, under
                            such protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary,
                            permit the desired use, but only when the use would promote
                            the effectiveness and objectives of this chapter;...

                                    (d)      Special permits for land the area of which is
                            greater than fifteen acres...shall be subject to approval by the
                            land use commission. The land use commission may impose
                            additional restrictions as may be necessary or appropriate in
                            granting the approval, including the adherence to
                            representations made by the applicant."

                  103.      Compliance with SLUC Agricultural District Standards.              The proposed

uses include the development of: solar energy facilities (within B rated lands); and utilities.

The AES Hawai'i Substation and the Kaawanui Substation are permitted uses pursuant to HRS

Section 205-4.5(a)(7). The remainder of the Project is a use under HRS Sections 205-2(d)(6)(B)

and 205-4.5(a)(21) which may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a Special Permit pursuant to

HRS Section 205-6.            The Applicant will satisfy the special provisions applicable to solar

energy facilities.




                                                     -28-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  104.      Agricultural Activities. As discussed in the Agricultural Plan, the Applicant

will lease the usable portions of the Project Site for Agricultural Activities at rates which are at

least 50% below the fair market rental value.

                  105.      Decommissioning. The Applicant will provide such security as required by

HRS §205-4.5(a)(21)to insure the decommissioning and removal of the solar energy facility at the

end of the lease term. The Kaawanui Substation is not subject to the decommissioning requirement

and will not be removed, as it will continue to be owned and operated by KIUC as part of its

island-wide grid system.

                  106.      State Planning Act. The State Planning Act contains Objectives and Policies

to assist the State in attaining its long-range planning Goals. Included in the Objectives and Policies

are the following:

                            a.      "§226-18 Objectives and policies for facility systems—
                                    energy.

                            (a)     Planning for the State's facility systems with regard to energy
                            shall be directed toward the achievement of the following objectives,
                            giving due consideration to call:

                                   (1)    Dependable, efficient, and economical statewide
                            energy systems capable of supporting the needs of the people;

                                   (2)     Increased energy, self-sufficiency where the ratio of
                            indigenous to imported energy use is increased;

                                    (3)     Greater energy security and diversification in the face
                            of threats to Hawai'i's energy supplies and systems; and

                                   (4)     Reduction, avoidance, or sequestration of greenhouse
                            gas emissions from energy supply and use.
                                                           . . .




                                                     -29-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            (c)      To further achieve the energy objectives, it shall be the policy
                            of this State to:

                                    (1)    Support research and development as well as promote
                            the use of renewable energy sources;
                                                            . . .

                                    (7)     Promote alternate fuels and transportation energy
                            efficiency;

                                    (8)   Support actions that reduce, avoid, or sequester
                            greenhouse gases in utility, transportation, and industrial sector
                            applications;
                                                              . . .

                                   (10) Provide priority handling and processing for all state
                            and county permits required for renewable energy projects....

                            b.      §226-108 Sustainability. Priority guidelines and principles
                                    to promote sustainability shall include:
                                                             . . .

                                    (2)     Encouraging planning that respects and promotes
                            living within the natural resources and limits of the State...."

                  107.      Compliance with State Plan.        The proposed Project complies with the

State Planning Act in that it will: provide dependable, efficient, and economical energy; increase

energy self-sufficiency; promote energy security; reduce greenhouse gas emissions; and promote

living within the natural resources and limits of the State.

                  108.      Coastal Zone Management Area. As set forth in HRS Chapter 205A

(Part I), all lands in the State of Hawai'i (including the Project Site) are located in the CZMA and

subject to the objectives and policies of the CZMP. HRS Section 205A-2 describes these

objectives and policies, all of which seek to protect and preserve the following public resources;

recreational resources; historic resources; scenic and open space resources; coastal ecosystems;




                                                      -30-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
economic uses; coastal hazards; managing development; public participation; beach protection;

and marine resources.

                  109.      Location Within CZMA.        The Project Site contains approximately

269.195 acres and is located adjacent to and mauka of Kaumuali'i Highway. The Project Site at

its closest point (east/makai) is located approximately 700 feet from the shoreline, at an elevation

of approximately 20 feet above mean seal level (msl). The Project Site rises in the northwesterly

direction (mauka) to an elevation of approximately 215 feet above msl. At its mauka side, the

Project Site is located over 2.0 mile from the closest State Forest Reserve Lands.

                  110.      Recreational Resources. There are no public recreational opportunities

taking place on the Project Site. The proposed Project will have no impacts on the public's

access rights to the Shoreline or Forest Reserve areas. The construction of the Project will not

overburden the use of, nor restrict access to, the Shoreline or the Forest Reserve areas.

                  111.      Historic Resources. The only known historic, cultural or archaeological

resources located on or near the Project Site are related to plantation era improvements.

As a result, the proposed Project will not have any significant impacts on any pre-contact

Historic Sites. There are no known traditional or customary practices of native Hawaiians

(including gathering or religious practices) presently occurring on the Project Site; there are no

pre-contact cultural or historic sites or resources located on the Project Site; and there are no

known native Hawaiian burials on the Project Site. In addition, the Project will not detrimentally

affect access to streams, to the shoreline, or to mountain areas.

                  112.      Scenic and Open Space Resources. The proposed Project will have only

minor impacts on the scenic and open space resources on and around the Project Site. The

Project will be compatible with and blend into the surrounding area. The Project will not

                                                  -31-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
interfere with any views to or along the shoreline.           The Applicant will use additional

landscaping, if necessary, to provide reasonable mitigation to the visual impacts the Project may

have on the scenic quality of the Project Site and on views from Kaumuali'i Highway and other

surrounding areas.

                  113.      Coastal Ecosystems. The Project Site is not located near or along the

Shoreline and is not part of the coastal ecosystem of this area. The proposed Project will have no

impact on the coastal ecosystem. The Project will be constructed and maintained so that any

erosion or increased runoff will be maintained on site, and will not be allowed to enter into the

Shoreline, the ocean, any streams, or any drainageways leading to the ocean. No aspect of the

Project will endanger the coastal ecosystem or have any negative impacts on it.

                  114.      Economic Uses. The Project will create short term economic benefits

associated with the construction of the Project and long-term economic benefits associated with

maintenance and operational activities on the Project Site. The proposed Project will not have

any negative impacts on the economy.

                  115.      Coastal Hazards.   The Project Site is not located near or along the

Shoreline and will not be subject to any coastal hazards.          The Project Site is located in

Flood Zone X and will not be exposed to flooding.             The proposed Project will have no

contributory impact on flooding on or around the Project Site. Any additional surface water

flows caused by the Project will be maintained on Parcels 6 and 10.

                  116.      Managing Development/Public Participation. Since early 2025, AES has

been meeting, conducting workshops, and communicating with the greater West Kaua'i

community, persons with knowledge of the Project Site and surrounding areas, governmental

representatives, and other interested organizations and parties concerning the Project. AES has

                                                  -32-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
elicited and made best efforts to mitigate and address the concerns raised by the community

regarding the Project.           This continued public participation has been further insured by the

process by which this Application was heard by the Planning Commission and will be heard by

the SLUC.

                  117.      Beach Protection/Marine Resources. The Project Site is not located near

or along the Shoreline. The Project will have no impact on any shoreline or beach areas, or on

any open space areas along the Shoreline. The Project will not involve any development within

the beach or coastal area that would have any negative impact on marine or coastal resources.

The Kekupua Fishpond and the Makaweli Landing are located on the makai side of

Kaumuali'i Highway, across from the Project Site. The Project will have no impact on these

features.

                  118.      Impacts Within CZMA. The Project on the Project Site will have no

negative impact on the CZMA and will be consistent with and non-violative of the objectives

and policies of the CZMP in the following respects:

                            a.       The Project will be compatible with existing uses in areas on or

around the Project Site.

                            b.       The Project will not negatively impact scenic or open space

resources within the CZMA.

                            c.       The Project will not increase runoff or otherwise endanger the

coastal ecosystem.

                            d.       The Project on the Project Site will not be located in a coastal

hazard area.




                                                    -33-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            e.      The Project will have no detrimental impact on recreational,

historic, or economic resources.

                            f.      The Project will not have detrimental impacts on beach or marine

resources.

                            g.      Approval of the Project will not result in the foreclosure of future

management options for development in the area.

                            h.      The design, siting, and landscaping of the Project as proposed will

ensure that the proposed Project will recognize, preserve, maintain and contribute to the

characteristics of the surrounding lands. In particular, the Project will be compatible with, and

will protect, the unique natural forms of, biologic systems contained within, and aesthetic

characteristic of, the CZMA.

                  119.      Sea Level Rise. With the exception of a portion of the A'akuki Stream,

the Project Site is not located in the Sea Level Rise Exposure Area (3.2 feet scenario). None of

the Project Improvements will be subject to flooding caused by Sea Level Rise.

GENERAL PLAN CONSIDERATIONS

                  120.      Kaua'i General Plan Land Use Designation. As shown on the Waimea-

Kekaha Land Use Map (which is contained in the Kaua'i General Plan as Figure 5-2), the Project

Site is located in the Agricultural Land Use Designation.

                  121.      Goals. The overall Goals contained in Section 1.3 of the Kaua'i General

Plan, and the Project's compliance therewith, are as follows:

                            a.      Goal 1 – A Sustainable Island.      The Project will promote the

operation of a clean and sustainable source of additional electrical generation and storagefor Kaua'i.




                                                    -34-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            b.      Goal 2 – A Unique and Beautiful Place. The Project will benefit

human health and the Kaua'i environment through the use of additional electrical generation and

storage that does not result in greenhouse gases, water contamination, and other environmental

impacts associated with fossil fuel production and use.

                            c.      Goal 3 – A Healthy and Resilient People. The Project will have

minimal visual impacts and will have no negative impacts on historic sites or Hawaiian cultural

practices.

                            d.      Goal 4 – An Equitable Place, with Opportunity for All. The Project

will independently enhance the stability and operation of the solar electric services on Kaua'i.

                  122.      Policies. The Policies contained in Section 1.4 of the Kaua'i General Plan,

and the Project's compliance therewith, are as follows:

                            a.      Manage Growth to Preserve Rural Character. The Project will not

detract from the rural characteristics of Kaua'i. It will support agricultural, commercial, resort, and

residential activities on Kaua'i by providing additional electric generation and storage resources.

                            b.      Provide Local Housing. The Project will have no negative impacts

on local housing.

                            c.      Recognize the Identity of Kaua'i's Individual Towns and Districts.

The Project will help ensure that additional electric generation and storage resourcesare available on

Kaua'i.

                            d.      Design Healthy and Complete Neighborhoods. The Project will help

provide the alternative solar electric services necessary for healthy and complete neighborhoods.




                                                    -35-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            e.      Make Strategic Infrastructure Investments. The Project will help

create the necessary infrastructure for growth areas identified in the Kaua'i General Plan.

                            f.      Reduce the Cost of Living. The Project will produce lower cost solar

electric services which in turn will help reduce housing, food and transportation costs.

                            g.      Build a Balanced Transportation System.       The Project will not

increase traffic or congestion problems.

                            h.      Protect Kaua'i's Scenic Beauty. The Project will have minimalvisual

impacts.

                            i.      Uphold Kaua'i as a Unique Visitor Destination. The Project will

provide necessary additional electric generation and storage resourcesto visitor destination area on

Kaua'i, but will not in and of itself result in increased visitor numbers.

                            j.      Help Business Thrive.      The Project will provide dependable,

additional electric generation and storage resources in support of business and commercial activities

on Kaua'i.

                            k.      Help Agricultural Lands Be Productive.       The Project will help

provide additional electric generation and storage resources for agricultural activities on Kaua'i.

The Project will have no negative impact on surrounding agricultural uses, and will remove only a

minimal amount of land from the 136,908 acres of lands available within the SLUC Agricultural

District on Kaua'i.

                            l.      Protect Our Watersheds. The Project will have no negative impacts

on the watershed areas.




                                                    -36-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            m.      Complete Kaua'i's Shift to Clean Energy.     The purpose of the

Project is to utilize agricultural lands for the implementation of solar energy facilities for solar

energy generation. The Project will assist KIUC in meeting the State of Hawai‘i’s mandate to

achieve 100% renewable energy by 2045. In 2023, Kaua‘i achieved 58% renewable energy

production. The Project will produce over 17% of the total energy requirements for Kaua‘i, and

it will allow KIUC to make significant progress toward achieving 100% renewable energy.

Additionally, with the upcoming sunsetting of federal tax credits for renewable energy projects,

this is one of the last projects to qualify for those credits. These tax credits allow the Project to

sell energy to KIUC at a low, fixed rate, and those savings get passed along to the customer.

Other projects coming online after 2030 will not have that same opportunity.

                            n.      Prepare for Climate Change. Operation of the Project will not

contribute to global GHG emissions and climate change. The operation of the Project will have

substantial beneficial impacts by reducing the State and Kaua‘i’s reliance on fossil fuels and their

contribution to global climate change by meeting the State of Hawai‘i’s mandate to achieve

100% renewable energy by 2045. The Project will produce renewable energy through the

proposed solar energy generating infrastructures and facilities.

                            o.      Respect Native Hawaiian Rights and Wahi Pana. The Project will

have no substantial impacts on any historic sites, Hawaiian traditional and cultural practices, or

access to streams, shorelines, or areas associated with Hawaiian religious, traditional or cultural

practices.

                            p.      Protect Access to Kaua'i's Treasured Places. The Project will have

no impact on the public's access to streams, the shoreline, trails, recreational areas, or places

associated with Hawaiian religious, cultural, or traditional practices.

                                                    -37-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            q.      Nurture Our Keiki. The Project will help provide a stable, additional

electric generation and storage resources that will allow Kaua'i's young people to grow and flourish.

                            r.      Honor Our Kūpuna.        The Project will help provide a stable,

dependable additional electric generation and storage resources that will help create and sustain

services and facilities to meet the needs of the Kūpuna of Kaua'i.

                            s.      Communicate with Aloha. The scheduling of this Application before

the Planning Commission will allow the public to participate in the planning and decision-making

process for the Project.

                  123.      Objectives & Actions by Sectors.       The ten (10) Sectors contained in

Section 3.0 of the Kaua'i General Plan (which represent the areas that must be considered in policy

implementation), and the Project's compliance therewith, are as follows:

                            a.      The Watershed. It is believied the Project will have no negative

impacts on the natural, historic, cultural, or environmental qualities of, or resources within, the

Watershed areas, or access thereto.

                            b.      Housing. Land easement payments will be made to a local land

manager, G&R, which employs many people and provides housing through the Plantation

Camps. These payments will give them the means to expand their business and upgrade

infrastructure and housing. Additionally, the project will improve grid stability and reliability on

the West side and increase renewable energy resources. This will allow for future population

growth and expansion of the housing market.

                            c.      Transportation.   During construction, temporary traffic will be

mitigated through a Traffic Management Plan. Once operational, the Project will not increase

traffic and will have no negative impact on Kaua‘i’s transportation infrastructure.

                                                      -38-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            d.      Infrastructure & Services. The Project will be an essential part of a

stable and dependable alternative solar electric service which promotes lower-cost services in

support of future growth. These benefits will accrue to all residents, including those living in low-

income communities.

                            e.      Shared Spaces. The Project will have no negative impacts on the

county's efforts to maintain and use Shared Spaces.

                            f.      Economy.     The Project will be an essential part of a stable,

dependable, sustainable alternative solar electric service that will support the full range of economic

activities (including agricultural activities) on Kaua'i. Although located in the Kaua'i General Plan

Agricultural Land Use designation, the Project: is not located on Important Agricultural Lands;

represents a small percentage of the total available Agricultural zoned lands on Kaua'i

(268.4 acres of 136,908 acres); will have no impact on surrounding agricultural activities on

surrounding lands; and will support its own agricultural activities with a local agricultural partner.

Additionally, over the Project’s lifetime, including direct, indirect, and induced effects, the

Project is estimated to generate or sustain up to approximately 1,064 total jobs in Hawai‘i, $77.9

million in local labor income, and a total local economic output of $216.7 million. The land

easement payment will be made to a local landowner, ensuring the money stays in Kauaʻi’s

economy.

                            g.      Heritage Resources. The Project will have minimalvisual impacts on

surrounding lands, and no substantial impacts on historic sites, Hawaiian cultural or traditional

practices, or access to streams, shorelines, areas associated with Hawaiian cultural or traditional

practices, recreational areas or other special places. The Project does not contain and will not




                                                     -39-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
negatively impact any special features or resources that are shown on the Waimea-Kekaha Heritage

Resource Map (Kaua'i General Plan Figure 5-9).

                            h.      Energy Sustainability. The Project will: reduce fossil fuel uses;

promote the transition to renewable resources; encourage the use of alternative power sources;

promote clean, green energy production; and reduce energy costs.

                            i.      Public Safety & Hazards Resiliency.     The Project will provide

additional electric generation and storage resources during natural emergencies. The Project is not

located near the shoreline and will not be subject to sea level rise.

                            j.      Opportunity & Health For All. The Project will be part of a stable

and dependable additional electric generation and storage resources, which is an essential

component of maintaining and growing educational and healthcare services which benefit all

residents.

                  124.      Compliance with Kaua'i General Plan Standards. The Project itself will

have no significant impact on the surrounding environment. The Project will include uses that are

compatible with agricultural and other uses in the area, as well as with the surrounding environment.

The Project will help provide a stable, independent source of additional electric generation and

storage resources, which will assist agricultural activities on Kaua'i.

CZO AGRICULTURE AND OPEN DISTRICT CONSIDERATIONS

                  125.      CZO Agriculture District. The Project is located primarily within the CZO

Agriculture District. The purposes of the CZO Agriculture District are set forth in CZO Article 8,

which provides in relevant part as follows:




                                                    -40-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            "Sec. 8-8.1     Purpose.

                                    The Agriculture District establishes means by which
                            land needs for existing and potential agriculture can be both
                            protected and accommodated, while providing the
                            opportunity for a wider range of the population to become
                            involved in agriculture by allowing the creation of a
                            reasonable supply of various sized parcels.

                                    (a)   To protect the agriculture potential of lands
                            within the County of Kaua'i to insure a resource base
                            adequate to meet the needs and activities of the present and
                            future.

                                   (b)      To assure a reasonable relationship between
                            the availability of agriculture lands for various agriculture
                            uses and the feasibility of those uses.

                                    (c)     To limit and control the dispersal of
                            residential and urban use within agriculture lands."

                  126.      Generally Permitted Uses And Structures. CZO Section 8-2.4(r) contains

the Permitted Uses in the CZO Agriculture District, which include the following:

                            "(22) Solar energy facilities placed within land with soil
                            classified by the State of Hawai'i Land Study Bureau's
                            detailed land classification as overall (master) productivity
                            rating B, C, D or E; those facilities placed within land with
                            soil classified as overall productivity rating class B and C
                            shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the acreage
                            of the parcel, or twenty (20) acres of land, whichever is less."

                  127.      Uses And Structures That Require A Use Permit. CZO Section 8-2.4(s)

contains the Uses in the CZO Agriculture District which require a Use Permit and include the

following:

                            "(16) Private and public utility facilities.
                                                       . . .

                            (21) Any other use or structure which the Planning
                            Director finds to be similar in nature to those listed in this
                            section and appropriate to the District."

                                                     -41-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  128.      Compliance with CZO Agriculture District Standards. The proposed Project

(including the AES Hawai'i Substation and the Kaawanui Substation) will require a Use Permit

pursuant to CZO Sections 8-2.4(r)(22), (s)(16) and (s)(21). The Project itself will have no

significant impact on the surrounding environment. The Project will include uses that are

compatible with other uses in the area, as well as with the surrounding environment. As such, the

Project complies with CZO Section 8-8.1 in that it: assures a reasonable relationship between the

availability of agricultural lands for various agricultural uses and the feasibility of those uses; and

will be incidental to the agricultural uses and the agricultural character of the surrounding lands.

                  129.      CZO Open District. A small portion of the Project Site is located within the

CZO Open District. The purposes of the CZO Open District are set forth in CZO Article 9, which

provides in relevant part as follows:

                            "Sec. 8-9.1    Purpose.

                                    The Open District is established and regulated to
                            create and maintain an adequate and functional amount of
                            predominantly open land to provide for the recreational and
                            aesthetic needs of the community or to provide for the
                            effective functioning of land, air, water, plant and animal
                            systems or communities.
                                    (a)     To preserve, maintain or improve the
                            essential characteristics of land and water areas that are:
                                            (1)      of significant value to the public as
                            scenic or recreational sources;
                                            (2)      important to the overall structure and
                            organization of urban areas and which provide accessible and
                            usable open areas for recreational and aesthetic purposes;
                                            (3)      necessary to insulate or buffer the
                            public and places of residence from undesirable
                            environmental factors caused by, or related to, particular uses
                            such as noise, dust, and visually offensive elements.
                                    (b)     To preserve, maintain or improve the
                            essential functions of physical and ecological systems, forms



                                                     -42-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            or forces which significantly affect the general health, safety
                            and welfare.
                                    (c)      To define and regulate use and development
                            within areas which may be potentially hazardous.
                                    (d)      To include areas indicated on the County
                            General Plan as open or as parks.
                                    (e)      To include areas clearly indicated on the
                            County General Plan or on Zoning maps as "Special
                            Treatment – Open Space" if an applicant represents to
                            government authorities that any properties or areas within a
                            development proposal or subdivision application will remain
                            in either permanent open space or private park areas, or if the
                            Council in the exercise of its zoning power requires as a
                            condition of rezoning that an area be designated for
                            permanent open space or private park. This does not
                            preclude the Council from exercising its zoning authority as
                            provided in Sec. 46-4, Hawai'i Revised Statutes. Within
                            areas so designated, no uses, structures, or development
                            inconsistent with such designation shall be generally
                            permitted or permitted by use permit without express
                            provision to the contrary. The Council is hereby authorized
                            to make such factual determinations as necessary incident to
                            this section.
                                    (f)      To provide for other areas which because of
                            more detailed analysis, or because of changing settlement
                            characteristics, are determined to be of significant value to
                            the public."

                  130.      Uses And Structures Permitted With A Use Permit. CZO Section 8-2.4(u)

contains the Uses And Structures Permitted With A Use Permit within the CZO Open District,

which includes the following:

                            "(14) Utility Installations.

                            (15) Any other use or structure which the Planning
                            Director finds to be similar in nature to those listed in this
                            Section and appropriate to the District."

                  131.      Standards For Construction And Use Within An Open District. CZO

Section 8-9.2 regulates land coverage in the CZO Open District and provides as follows:




                                                     -43-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            "(a)    Land Coverage:
                                    (1)     The amount of land coverage created,
                            including buildings and pavement, shall not exceed
                            ten per cent (10%) of the lot or parcel area."

                  132.      Compliance With CZO Open District Standards. The Project is a use

and structure permitted with a Use Permit within the CZO Open District pursuant to CZO

Section 8-2.4(u)(14) and (15). As discussed in Section 10, the Project will comply with the CZO

Use Permit Standards. The Land Coverage on the Project Site will not exceed ten percent (10%).

The Project itself will have no significant impact on the surrounding environment. As such, the

Project complies with CZO Section 8-9.1 in that it: will help to preserve, maintain, and improve the

natural characteristics of the area; will allow the area to remain predominantly free of development;

and will be incidental to the use and open character of the surrounding lands.

USE PERMIT AND ZONING PERMIT CONSIDERATIONS

                  133.      Uses. Pursuant to CZO Section 8-3.2, the Applicant has applied for a

Use Permit for the proposed Project. Consistent with CZO Sections 8-2.4(r)(22), (s)(16) and

(s)(21), as to the CZO Agriculture District, and CZO Sections 8-2.4(u)(14) and (15), as to the

CZO Open District, the proposed uses and structures are Solar Energy Facilities which are Uses

And Structures For Which A Use Permit Is Required within the CZO Agriculture District and

CZO Open District, respectively.

                  134.      Compatibility With Surrounding Uses. The Project Site is surrounded by

or located in the vicinity of properties located within the SLUC Agricultural District and

Urban District, and the CZO Resort District, Agriculture District, Plantation Camp District, and

Open District. Uses on the surrounding lands include farm dwelling uses, residential uses, and




                                                   -44-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
agricultural uses. The Project Site is similar in topography, character, and nature with adjacent

and surrounding properties, and the Project is consistent with such surrounding uses.

                  135.      Compliance with CZO Use Permit Standards. The Project on the

Project Site complies with the standards for Use Permits as contained in CZO Section 8-3.2(e)(1)

in that the Project will be:

                            a.      a compatible use;

                            b.      not detrimental to health of persons residing or working in

the neighborhood;

                            c.      not detrimental to safety of persons residing or working in

the neighborhood;

                            d.      not detrimental to peace of persons residing or working in

the neighborhood;

                            e.      not detrimental to morals of persons residing or working in

the neighborhood;

                            f.      not detrimental to comfort and general welfare of persons residing or

working in the neighborhood;

                            g.      not detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in

the neighborhood;

                            h.      not detrimental to the general welfare of the community;

                            i.      not a cause of substantial harmful environmental consequences to the

Project Site, or to other lands or waters;

                            j.      not inconsistent with the intent of Chapter 8, KCC; and

                            k.      not inconsistent with the General Plan.

                                                     -45-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  136.      Compliance with CZO Class IV Zoning Permit Standards. The Applicant

has complied with the procedural provisions for a Class IV Zoning Permit by its filing and

processing of this Application.

DEVELOPMENT PLAN CONSIDERATIONS

                  137.      Community Plan Area. The Project Site is located in the West Kaua'i

geographic area and is subject to the provisions of the West Kaua'i Community Plan ("WKCP")

as set forth in Title IV, Chapter 10, Article 3 of the Kaua'i County Code, 1987 ("KCC").

                  138.      Land Use. The desired long-range land use pattern for the Project Site is

shown on the West Kaua'i Regional Map (Figure 12 of the WKCP) and on the Makaweli Town

Plan Map (Figure 15 of the WKCP). In both cases, the maps provide for an Agriculture Land

Use designation for the Project Site.

                  139.      Regional Policies. The Regional Policies set forth in the WKCP, and the

Project's compliance with such policies, are as follows:

                            a.      Town Design.

                                    (i)    Town Design Policy #1. Focus development in existing

towns to protect West Kaua'i's rural qualities and agricultural resources.

                                           Response. The Project could not be placed next to an

existing town, because it is utility-scale and requires 200+ acres of land. However, the

compatible agriculture plan will increase the amount of agriculture occurring on this land,

expanding the agricultural resources in West Kaua'i.

                                    (ii)   Town Design Policy #2. Strengthen and activate town

centers through development that supports the unique character of each town.




                                                   -46-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                                            Response.   The   Project   is   not   applicable   to   this

design policy.

                                    (iii)   Town Design Policy #3.       Meet the housing needs of

West Kaua'i's residents by expanding mixed-use communities that are walkable, bikeable,

and resilient.

                                            Response. Land easement payments will be made to a local

land manager, G&R, which employs many people and provides housing through the Plantation

Camps. These payments will give them the means to expand their business and upgrade

infrastructure in the Plantation Camps. Additionally, the Project will improve grid stability and

reliability on the West side and increase renewable energy resources. This will allow for future

population growth and expansion of the housing market.

                                    (iv)    Town Design Policy #4. Protect and support the unique

Plantation Camps.

                                            Response. Land easement payments will be made to a local

land manager, G&R, which employs many people and provides housing through the

Plantation Camps. These payments will give them the means to expand their business and

upgrade infrastructure in the Plantation Camps. Additionally, during the early project design,

land within the Kaawanui Village Plantation Camp Urban Zoning expansion area was

considered for the Project. AES removed the Plantation Camp zoning expansion area from the

Project footprint to protect and support the future growth of Kaawanui Village.




                                                    -47-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            b.      Land Transportation.

                                    (i)     Land   Transportation   Policy   #1.   Work    with   the

Hawai'i Department of Transportation (HDOT) to identify congestion relief measures along

Kaumuali'i Highway.

                                            Response. During construction, the Project will implement

a Traffic Management Plan to mitigate traffic impacts along Kaumuali'i Highway. During

operation, the Project will not have any negative impact on this Policy.

                                    (ii)    Land Transportation Policy #2. Improve bus service by

implementing the West Kaua'i components of the Kaua'i Short-Range Transit Plan.

                                            Response.      The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy.

                                    (iii)   Land Transportation Policy #3. In each community,

establish "safe routes"—primarily street networks that safely accommodate pedestrians and

bicyclists to get from homes to schools, parks, shops, jobs, and services.

                                            Response.      The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy.

                                    (iv)    Land Transportation Policy #4. Establish shared-use paths

for bicyclists and pedestrians that connect Westside towns.

                                            Response.      The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy.

                            c.      Heritage Resources.

                                    (i)     Heritage Resources Policy #1. Preserve and protect the

integrity of sacred heritage resources for current and future generations.

                                                    -48-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                                            Response.   The Project has conducted an AIS and will

follow the SHPD directive to preserve historic properties located within the Project Site as

required. Additionally, AES has consulted with the landowner, who has owned the land since

1865 and has an intimate knowledge of its history and heritage resources. With their input, the

Project is preserving historic properties significant to the family, such as the rock wall located

on both sides of Kaawanui Road.

                                    (ii)    Heritage Resources Policy #2. Celebrate the cultural and

historic features that represent West Kaua'i's diverse cultural influences.

                                            Response.      The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy.

                                    (iii)   Heritage Resources Policy #3. Uphold traditional and

customary rights.

                                            Response. The Project has conducted a Cultural Impact

Assessment with Ka Pa'akai Analysis, which confirms that the Project will not negatively impact

traditional and customary Native Hawaiian rights. Additionally, the Project has conducted

extensive community outreach, providing the public with multiple avenues to ask questions and

share their feedback and knowledge of the area. The Project will continue to collect feedback

throughout its life.

                                    (iv)    Heritage Resources Policy #4. Preserve West Kaua'i's

historic structures and perpetuate its unique architecture.

                                            Response. The Project will follow the SHPD directive to

preserve historic properties located within the Project Site as required. Additionally, AES has

consulted with the landowner, who has owned the land since 1865 and has an intimate

                                                    -49-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
knowledge of its history and heritage resources. With their input, the Project is preserving

historic properties significant to the family, such as the rock wall located on both sides of

Kaawanui Road.

                            d.      Resiliency.

                                    (i)     Resiliency Policy #1. Adapt West Kaua'i's low-lying

neighborhoods for climate change impacts and lay the groundwork for managed retreat.

                                            Response. The Project, by generating energy from clean,

renewable solar energy, will prevent the burning of oil and reduce Kaua'i's greenhouse gas

emissions. This will ultimately help reduce the severity of climate change.

                                    (ii)    Resiliency Policy #2.   Increase the resiliency of flood-

prone neighborhoods through flood mitigation, drainage improvements, green infrastructure, and

updated building standards.

                                            Response. The Project, by generating energy from clean,

renewable solar energy, will prevent the burning of oil and reduce Kaua'i's greenhouse gas

emissions. This will ultimately help reduce the severity of climate change.

                                    (iii)   Resiliency Policy #3. Strengthen the resiliency of the

region's critical infrastructure and public facilities.

                                            Response. The Project will strengthen the electrical grid's

resilience by increasing renewable energy production and modernizing critical grid

infrastructure through the construction of the new Kaawanui Substation. The battery energy

storage system component of the Project also creates firm, dispatchable energy that can be

deployed when needed.




                                                     -50-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                                    (iv)   Resiliency Policy #4. Build on West Kaua'i's close-knit

community networks to promote regional resiliency and grassroots disaster planning and

preparedness.

                                           Response.    This    Project   will   build   Kauaʻi   energy

sovereignty, decreasing its reliance on foreign oil and insulating it from global disasters and

supply disruptions. The Project will strengthen the electrical grid's resilience by increasing

renewable energy production and modernizing critical grid infrastructure through the

construction of the new Kaawanui Substation. The battery energy storage system component of

the Project also creates firm, dispatchable energy that can be deployed when needed.

                                    (v)    Resiliency Policy #5. Ensure the long-term resiliency of

the land transportation network.

                                           Response.        The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy. There will be no alteration to the existing transportation network.

                                    (vi)   Resiliency Policy #6. Improve West Kaua'i's long-term

food security and sustain vital self-reliant community food systems.

                                           Response. The Project will contribute to West Kaua'i's

long-term food security through its compatible agriculture plan with a local agriculture partner.

The agricultural partner's goal is to produce food for commercial sale.

                            e.      Shared Spaces.

                                    (i)    Shared Spaces Policy #1. Support community-led design,

programming, and stewardship of shared spaces.

                                           Response.        The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy.

                                                     -51-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                                    (ii)    Shared Spaces Policy #2. Protect the community's natural

and recreational resources in perpetuity.

                                            Response.      The Project will not have any negative

impacts on this Policy.

                            f.      Economic Development.

                                    (i)     Economic Development Policy #1. Uphold Agriculture as

an anchor industry.

                                            Response. Through the compatible agriculture component

of this Project, more agriculture will occur because of the Project than what is currently

occurring on the land. Recently, the land has mainly been used for rotational grazing.

Under the compatible agriculture plan, the agricultural partner will work to produce food for

commercial sale.

                                    (ii)    Economic Development Policy #2. Provide supportive

environments for business success.

                                            Response.   The Project will increase grid stability and

resilience, creating a dependable energy supply for businesses. It will also provide energy at a

low, fixed cost, cheaper than the current cost of fossil fuels, contributing to a lower cost of

energy for businesses.

                                    (iii)   Economic Development Policy #3. Grow science literacy

and invest in a STREAM-ready workforce.

                                            Response. Over the Project’s lifetime, including direct,

indirect, and induced effects, the Project is estimated to generate or sustain up to approximately

1,064 total jobs in Hawai'i, including local construction and Operations and Maintenance jobs

                                                    -52-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
on Kauaʻi. Additionally, AES has been an active educational partner since 2019, supporting and

participating in Kauaʻi STREAM events and programs, including but not limited to: the

Kaua'i Community Science Center, educational tours of Lāwaʻi Solar + Storage, Career Fairs,

Teacher Trainings, and Earth Day presentations. AES has also funded college scholarships for

Kauaʻi STEM majors through the Hawaiʻi Community Foundation.

COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS FOR SLUC SPECIAL PERMIT

                  140.      Special Permit Requirements. The proposed Project will meet with the

requirements for an SLUC Special Permit, as contained in Hawai'i Revised Statutes Section 205-

6 and in Section 15-15-95 of the Land Use Commission Rules (Hawai'i Administrative Rules) as

set forth herein.

                  141.      The use will not be contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished

by the HRS Chapter 205 and 205A, and the SLUC Rules. The proposed use will not interfere

with other agricultural uses which are generally allowed within the SLUC Agricultural District.

It is consistent with solar facility uses which are allowed (with a Special Permit) in the SLUC

Agricultural District. It is also located so as to minimize impacts on agricultural activities in this

area.

                  142.      The desired use will not adversely affect surrounding property.        As

discussed herein, the proposed use will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and

uses, and will not generate any significant adverse impacts. It will not prevent surrounding lands

from being used for agricultural purposes.          The amount of additional traffic that will be

generated as a result of this proposal will be insignificant and will not create any substantial

adverse impacts.




                                                   -53-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  143.      The use will not unreasonably burden public agencies to provide roads and

streets, sewers, water, drainage and school improvements, and police and fire protection. As

discussed herein, no burden will be placed on public agencies to provide additional facilities,

services, and utilities as a result of this proposal. Conversely, by providing an alternative green

source of energy for electricity, it will promote the sustainability and availability of electrical

production resources for the public.

                  144.      Unusual conditions, trends and needs have arisen since the district

boundaries and regulations were established. The State has recently recognized the need to

promote alternative energy production, including solar energy production. Such facilities require

large areas, as are available in the SLUC Agricultural District compared to the SLUC Urban

District. Provided such new uses to not adversely impact surrounding agricultural activities, they

are recognized as necessary and permissible in the SLUC Agricultural District.

                  145.      The land on which the proposed use is sought is unsuited for the uses

permitted with the District. To the extent feasible, the Applicant will continue to use the Project

Site for Agricultural Activities as described in the Agricultural Plan. In addition, although the

Project Site is suitable for agricultural uses, it is better suited at this time for the production of

alternative energy production via the Project proposed herein.

HRS CHAPTER 343 (ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS)
CONSIDERATIONS

                  146.      HRS Chapter 343.      The Project is not subject to the provisions of

Hawai'i Revised Statutes Chapter 343.           HRS Chapter 343 requires the preparation of an

Environmental Assessment and/or an Environmental Impact Statement for certain activities as




                                                   -54-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
specified in HRS Section 343-5. The proposed Project does not fall within such specified

activities, in that the Project does not:

                            a.      Propose the use of state or county lands or the use of state or

county funds;

                            b.      Propose any use within any land classified as conservation district

by the State Land Use Commission under HRS Chapter 205;

                            c.      Propose any use within the shoreline area as defined in HRS

Section 205A-41;

                            d.      Propose any use within any historic site as designated in the

National Register or Hawai'i Register as provided for in the Historic Preservation Act of 1966,

Public Law 89-665, or HRS Chapter 6E;

                            e.      Propose any use within the Waikiki area of Oahu, the boundaries

of which are delineated in the land use ordinance as amended, establishing the "Waikiki Special

District";

                            f.      Propose any amendments to existing county general plans where

such amendment would result in designations other than agriculture, conservation, or

preservation;

                            g.      Propose any reclassification of any land classified as conservation

district by the State land Use Commission under HRS Chapter 205;

                            h.      Propose the construction of new, or the expansion or modification

of existing, helicopter facilities within the state; or

                            i.      Propose the construction of a wastewater treatment unit, waste-to-

energy facility, oil refinery, or power generating facility (which use petroleum based fuels).

                                                    -55-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
NATIVE HAWAIIAN ISSUES

                  147.      Traditional or Cultural Practices. An analysis of the traditional or cultural

practices occurring on or related to the Project Site have been addressed in the Archaeological

Reports, in the Community Outreach Report, in the Cultural Impact Assessment and Ka Pa'akai

Analysis for Kaawanui Project (Cultural Surveys Hawaii, Inc.), and in the Cultural Study

(collectively, the "Ka Pa'akai Report"). The conclusion contained in the Ka Pa'akai Report is

that the Project will have no impact on any known traditional or customary practices of native

Hawaiians within the Project Site. As noted in the Ka Pa'akai Report, no traditional cultural

properties were identified as existing, and no traditional cultural practices were identified as

taking place, within the Project Site or its vicinity.

                  148.      Summary of Impacts on Traditional or Cultural Practices. In summary,

the Project will have no impact on any known traditional or customary practices of native

Hawaiians for the following reasons:

                            a.      There are no known traditional or customary practices of native

Hawaiians that are presently occurring within the Project Site.

                            b.      There are no special gathering practices taking place within any

portion of the Project Site.

                            c.      The Project will not detrimentally affect: access to any streams;

access to the shoreline or other adjacent shoreline areas; or gathering along any streams, the

shoreline or in the ocean.

                            d.      There are no known religious practices taking place within the

Project Site.




                                                    -56-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            e.      There are no known pre-contact cultural or historic sites or

resources located within the Project Site.

                            f.      There are no known burials within the Project Site.

                           RULINGS ON PROPOSED FINDINGS OF FACT

                  Any of the proposed findings of fact submitted by any party not already ruled

upon by the Planning Commission by adoption, or rejected by clearly contrary findings of fact,

are hereby denied.

                  Any conclusions of law herein improperly designated as a finding of fact should

be deemed or construed as a conclusion of law; and finding of fact herein improperly designated

as a conclusion of law should be deemed or construed as a finding of fact.

                                        CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

                  1.        The Planning Commission has jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to:

Section 205-6, HRS; HAR Section 5-15-95 et seq.; CZO Sections 8-2.4(r)(22), (s)(16) and

(s)(21); CZO Sections 8-2.4(u)(14) and (u)(15); CZO Sections 8-3.1 and 8-9.4; and Chapter 13

of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Planning Commission.

                  2.        Based upon the record of the proceedings before the Planning Commission

and pursuant to CZO Sections 8-3.1, 8-3.2, 8-8.4 and 8-9.4, the Planning Commission approves

Use Permit No. U-2026-9 and Class IV Zoning Permit No. Z-IV-2026-12 for the Kaawanui

Substation located on the Project Site.

                  3.        Based upon the record of the proceedings before the Planning

Commission, and pursuant to Planning Commission Rules ("PC Rules") Chapter 13, HRS

Section 205-6, and HAR Section 15-15-95 et seq., the Planning Commission recommends the

approval of a State Special Permit for the Project on the Project Site, consisting of an

                                                    -57-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
approximately 269.195 acre portion of land in the SLUC Agricultural District identified by

Kauai Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 ("Parcel 6") and (4) 1-7-006:010 ("Parcel 10") in

Makaweli, Waimea, Kaua'i, Hawai'i.

                  4.        The Project constitutes an unusual and reasonable use within the SLUC

Agricultural District other than those for which the district is classified, will promote the

effectiveness and objectives of HRS Chapter 205 within the SLUC Agricultural District, and

complies with HRS Section 205-6(a).

                  5.        The Project constitutes an exceptional situation where the use desired will

not change the essential character of the district nor be inconsistent therewith. Save Sunset

Beach Coalition v. City and County of Honolulu, 102 Haw. 465, 78 P.3d 1 (2003).

                  6.        The Project constitutes a use that will promote the effectiveness and

objectives of HRS Chapter 205, and complies with HRS 205-6(c).

                  7.        The Project is consistent with the "overarching purpose" of HRS

Chapter 205 which is to "protect and conserve natural resources and foster intelligent, effective,

and orderly land allocation and development."              Kauai Springs v. Planning Commission,

130 Haw. 407, 312 P.3d 283 (2013).

                  8.        The Project Site is not designated as Important Agricultural Land under

Part III of HRS Chapter 205, and therefore the Project does not conflict with any part of

HRS Chapter 205, and complies with HRS Section 205-6(c).

                  9.        Article XI, Section 1, of the Hawai`i State Constitution requires the

State and the County to conserve and protect Hawai`i’s natural beauty and all natural resources,

including land, water, air, minerals, and energy sources, and to promote the development and




                                                    -58-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
utilization of these resources in a manner consistent with their conservation and in furtherance of

the self-sufficiency of the State.

                  10.       The Planning Commission has considered Article XI, Section 1, of the

Hawai`i State Constitution and finds that the Project is in compliance and non-violative

therewith, particularly with regard to its use of water resources.

                  11.       Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawai`i State Constitution requires the

State and the County to conserve and protect agricultural lands, promote diversified agriculture,

increase agricultural self-sufficiency, and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands.

                  12.       The Planning Commission has considered Article XI, Section 3, of the

Hawai`i State Constitution and finds that the Project is in compliance and non-violative

therewith.

                  13.       Article XII, Section 7, of the Hawai`i State Constitution requires the

Planning Commission to protect Native Hawaiian traditional and customary rights. The State

and the County are required to reaffirms and shall protect all rights, customarily and traditionally

exercised for subsistence, cultural, and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua`a tenants

who are descendants of Native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778,

subject to the right of the State and the County to regulate such rights.

                  14.       The Planning Commission has considered Article XII, Section 7, of the

Hawai`i State Constitution and finds that the Project is in compliance and non-violative

therewith.

                  15.       The State, the County, and their agencies are obligated to protect the

reasonable exercise of customarily and traditionally exercised Native Hawaiian rights to the

extent feasible. Public Access Shoreline Hawai`i v. Hawai`i County Planning Commission,

                                                  -59-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
79 Hawai`i 425, 903, P.2d 1246, certiorari denied, 517 U.S. 1163, 116 S.Ct. 1559, 134 L.Ed.2d

660 (1996). The Planning Commission has considered such responsibilities and obligations and

finds the Project to be consistent and non-violative therewith.

                  16.       The Planning Commission is empowered to preserve and protect

customary and traditional rights of Native Hawaiians. Ka Pa`akai 0 Ka`Aina v. Land Use

Commission, 94 Hawai`i 31, 7 P.3d 1068 (2000). The Planning Commission has considered

such responsibilities and obligations and finds the Project to be consistent and non-violative

therewith.

                  17.       HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21) permits Solar Energy Facilities on lands with

soil classified by the LSB’s detailed land classification as overall (master) productivity rating B

or C for which a special permit is granted pursuant to HRS Section 205-6; provided that:

                  (A)       The area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made available for
                            compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty percent
                            below the fair market rent for comparable properties;
                  (B)       Proof of financial security to decommission the facility is provided to the
                            satisfaction of the appropriate county planning commission prior to date of
                            commencement of commercial generation; and
                  (C)       Solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned at the owner's expense
                            according to the following requirements:
                            (i)     Removal of all equipment related to the solar energy facilities
                                    within 12 months of the conclusion of operation or useful life; and
                            (ii)    Restoration of the disturbed earth to substantially the
                                    same physical condition as existed prior to the development of
                                    the solar energy facilities.

                  18.       The Planning Commission finds the Project has satisfied the requirements

of HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21).

                  19.       The Planning Commission finds that the County and the Applicant have

satisfied the Notice requirements contained in: HRS Section 205-6; HAR Section 15-15-95(d);

CZO Sections 8-8.4, 8-9.4, 8-3.1(f) and 8-3.2(f); and PC Rules Section 1-13-5.

                                                      -60-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  20.       The Planning Commission finds that the Project is consistent with and

non-violative of the objectives, policies, and goals contained in: the State Plan; the Kauai

General Plan; CZO Chapter 8, Article 8 (Agriculture Districts) and Article 9 (Open Districts);

and the West Kaua'i Community Plan.

                  21.       The Planning Commission finds that the Project is consistent with and

non-violative of the standards and requirements for Use Permits contained in CZO

Section 8-3.2(e).

                  22.       The Planning Commission finds that the Project is consistent with and

non-violative of the standards and requirements for Class IV Zoning Permits contained in

CZO Sections 8-3.1, 8-8.4 and 8-9.4.

                  23.       The Planning Commission finds that the Project conforms with the

policies and objectives of the Coastal Zone Management Program and HRS Chapter 205A.

                  24.       The Planning Commission finds that the Project will not create any

Glint/Glare issues for airport related uses or aircraft operation.

                                       DECISION AND ORDER

                  Having duly considered the complete record in this matter and the oral arguments

presented by the Applicant in this proceeding, together with public testimony, and a motion

having been duly made and seconded at a meeting conducted on March 10, 2026, in Lihu'e,

Hawai`i, to approve the recommendation of the Planning Department, and the motion having

received the affirmative votes required by the CZO, the PC Rules, and HAR 15-15-13, and there

being good cause for the motion, the Planning Commission hereby APPROVES the

recommendation of the Planning Department approving a CZO Use Permit and CZO Class IV

Zoning Permit for the Project (including the Kaawanui Substation), and RECOMMENDS

                                                  -61-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
APPROVAL of a State Special Permit, for the Project (not including the Kaawanui Substation),

within the Project Site with modifications as proposed by the Planning Department and the

Planning Commission and as agreed to by the Applicant, consisting of an approximately

269.125 acre portion of land in the SLUC Agricultural District identified by Kauai Tax Map Key

Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 and (4) 1-7-006:010 in Makaweli, Waimea, Kaua'i, Hawai'i, and

approximately shown on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein,

subject to the following conditions:

                  1.        The project shall be constructed as represented.    Any changes to the

operation and/or the respective structures shall be reviewed by the Planning Director to

determine whether Planning Commission review and approval is warranted.

                  2.        Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall

be made available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50 percent below

the fair market rent for comparable properties, as long as the Project is in operation. Compatible

agricultural operations shall be established by the Applicant and its successors and/or assigns

within 6 months of the start of commercial power generation. Extensions to this deadline may be

granted by the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department for unforeseen extenuating

circumstances. Additional consideration may be given if the Applicant is actively seeking to

have such operations established.

                  3.        If at any time during the term of the subject permits no compatible

agricultural operations exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for 6 months, the Applicant

shall notify the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department in writing within 30 days

of the end of the 6-month period. If requested by the Planning Director, the Applicant shall

attend a meeting of the Planning Commission and submit a report to the Planning Commission

                                                   -62-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
detailing the Applicant’s actual and reasonable efforts to establish compatible agricultural

operations on the usable lands of the Petition Area. The Planning Commission may determine

whether probable cause exists to re-evaluate the subject permits and to hold a hearing pursuant to

the Rules of the Planning Commission. Extensions to the 6-month deadline may be granted by

the Planning Director for unforeseen extenuating circumstances.

                  4.        The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the

following from the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department, prior to the issuance

of a grading or building permit:

                            a.      A survey map accompanied by metes and bounds description of

the approved Petition Area.

                            b.      A site plan showing the area required under Condition 2, above,

relating to the minimum land area to be made available for compatible agricultural use.

                  5.        Prior to the closing of the building permit for the facility, the Applicant

shall submit to the County of Kaua'i Planning Department proof of financial security, such as a

letter of credit or similar assurance, from a creditworthy financial institution satisfactory to the

County of Kaua'i Planning Department. The security shall remain in place for the duration of the

operation of the Project, with evidence of same provided to the Director of the County of Kaua'i

Planning Department on an annual basis, in an amount approved by the County of Kaua'i

Planning Department as sufficient to decommission the Project and restore the Petition Area to

substantially the same physical condition as existed prior to the development of the facility.

                            The Applicant shall decommission the facility (not including the

Kaawanui Substation), including the removal of all equipment related to the facility, within

twelve (12) months following the termination of operations of the facility. A change in the

                                                    -63-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
project ownership or a change in ownership of the land subject to the Special Permit, which

warrants a new proof of financial security to decommission the project, shall be submitted to the

County of Kaua'i Planning Department for processing through the Planning Commission, within

three (3) months of the ownership change.

                            The Applicant shall incorporate this condition in the license and/or lease

agreement with the landowner and said license and/or lease agreement shall be reviewed for

approval by the County of Kaua'i Planning Department.

                  6.        The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to flora on site as follows:

                            a.      Prior to initiating any ground-disturbing activities, the Applicant

should identify and implement feasible measures to reasonably protect, replace or relocate any

indigenous or native plant species, or cultural and natural resources within the project area, based

on consultation with applicable governmental agencies.

                  7.        The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:

                            a.      Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training

module, which shall include all potential endangered species that may frequent the Petition Area.

                            b.      All construction workers and solar facility employees shall

undergo endangered species awareness training prior to starting work.

                            c.      In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed

Threatened Species, Newell’s Shearwater and other seabirds, external lighting shall be only of

the following types: shielded lights, cut-off luminaries, or indirect lighting. Spotlights aimed

upward or spotlighting of structures, landscaping or the ocean shall be prohibited.

                            d.      Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.




                                                    -64-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                            e.      Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring within the

Project Site, and report occurrences to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ("USFWS").

                            f.      Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing or grading activities

from June 1 through September 15.

                  8.        The Applicant shall begin commercial operations of the Project within

four (4) years of the date of the Land Use Commission's (LUC) Decision and Order approving

the Special Permit. Requests for extension of this deadline shall be submitted to the Director of

the County of Kaua'i Planning Department prior to the expiration of the deadline. The LUC may

grant an extension to the deadline to establish the Project due to unforeseen circumstances that

were beyond the control of the Applicant. This Special Permit shall be valid for a period of

thirty-five (35) years from the date of the start of commercial operations of the Project, subject to

further extensions upon a timely request for extension filed with the Planning Commission at

least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the Special Permit's expiration. Approval of time

extensions shall not be required from the LUC.

                  9.        On or before December 31 of each year that the Special Permit is in effect,

the Applicant or its successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, State of Hawai'i

Office of Planning, and the County of Kaua'i Planning Department that demonstrates the

Applicant’s compliance with conditions of the subject permits.

                  10.       Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to

significant increases in the number of PV panels; (2) amendments to the conditions of approval;

(3) significant expansions of the approved area; or (4) change in uses stated herein, shall be

subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and the SLUC. Minor

modifications including minor additions to accessory uses and structures, and new incidental

                                                    -65-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
uses and structures in the approved area are subject to review and approval by the Director of the

County of Kaua'i Planning Department.

                  11.       The Applicant shall notify the Director of the County of Kaua'i

Planning Department of:

                            a.      Any change or transfer of the license on the Petition Area.

                            b.      Any change in uses on the Petition Area.

                            c.      Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or

                            d.      Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.

                  12.       Enforcement of the conditions of the subject permits shall be enforced

pursuant to the Rules of the Planning Commission, including the issuance of an order to show

cause as to the reason the subject permits should not be revoked if the Planning Commission has

reason to believe that there has been a failure to perform the conditions herein.

                  13.       If the PV array or the Project creates a hazardous condition for pilots or

motorists, the facility operator shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon notification by

the State of Hawai'i Department of Transportation (DOT), DOT Airports Division, or the

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

                  14.       If required to mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping shall be installed

and maintained around the Solar Project to screen it when viewed from Kaumuali'i Highway.

The County of Kaua'i Planning Department shall determine whether additional landscape

screening is necessary and the degree at which it is provided.

                  15.       In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains,

structural remains, cultural deposits, artifacts, sand deposits, or sink holes, are identified during

grading and/or construction activities, all work shall cease in the immediate vicinity of the find,

                                                    -66-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
the find shall be protected from additional disturbance, and the State Historic Preservation

Division (SHPD) and Kaua'i Island Burial Council, as applicable, shall be contacted

immediately. Without any limitation to any other condition found herein, if any burials or

archaeological or historic sites are discovered during the course of construction of the facility, all

construction activity in the vicinity of the discovery shall stop until the issuance of an

archaeological clearance from the SHPD has been obtained that mitigation measures have been

implemented to its satisfaction.

                  16.       Project construction workers and all other personnel involved in the

construction and related activities of the Project shall be informed of the possibility of

inadvertent cultural finds, including human skeletal remains. In the event any potential historic

properties are identified during construction activities, all activities will cease and the SHPD will

be notified pursuant to HAR §13-280-3. In the event iwi kupuna (Native Hawaiian skeletal

remains) are identified, all earth moving activities in the area will stop, the area will be cordoned

off, and the SHPD and Police Department will be notified pursuant to HAR §13-300-40. In

addition, in the event of an inadvertent discovery of human remains, the completion of a burial

treatment plan, in compliance with HAR §13-300 and HRS §6E-43, is required.

                  17.       In the event iwi kupuna and/or cultural finds are encountered during

construction, Project proponents shall consult with cultural and lineal descendants of the area to

develop a reinterment plan and cultural preservation plan for proper cultural protocol, curation,

and long-term maintenance.

                  18.       The Applicant shall resolve and comply with all agency requirements as

recommended in the permit application review, including but not limited to the permit

requirements for the County DPW-Engineering Division, water requirements for the

                                                  -67-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
County Department of Water, requirements and recommendations of SHPD or the Kaua'i Island

Burial Council, and regulations involving environmental concerns as administered by the

State Department of Health.

                  19.       The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices

(BMP’s) to ensure the Project does not generate impacts that may affect the health, safety, and

welfare of those in the surrounding area of the proposal.

                  20.       The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building

techniques and operational methods for the Project, such as Leadership in Energy and

Environmental Design (L.E.E.D.) standards or another comparable state-approved, nationally

recognized, and consensus-based guideline, standard, or system, and strategies, which may

include but is not limited to recycling, natural lighting, extensive landscaping, solar panels, low-

energy fixtures, low energy lighting and other similar methods and techniques.              All such

proposals shall be reflected on the plans submitted for building permit review.

                  21.       To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and

applicable prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the Applicant shall seek to hire

Kaua'i contractors as long as they are qualified and reasonably competitive with other

contractors, and shall seek to employ residents of Kaua'i in temporary construction and

permanent jobs. It is recognized that the Applicant may have to employ non-Kaua'i residents for

particular skilled jobs where no qualified Kaua'i resident possesses such skills. For the purposes

of this condition, the Commission shall relieve the Applicant of this requirement if the Applicant

is subjected to anti-competitive restraints on trade or other monopolistic practices.




                                                   -68-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
                  22.       The Applicant is advised that prior to construction and/or use, additional

government agency conditions may be imposed. It shall be the Applicant’s responsibility to

resolve those conditions with the respective agency(ies).

                  23.       The Planning Commission reserves the right to revise, modify, add or

delete conditions of approval in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts this project may

create, or revoke the permits through the proper procedures should conditions of approval be

violated or adverse impacts be created that cannot be properly addressed.

                  24.       The portion of the Project containing the Kaawanui Substation shall

be subject to Conditions 1, 4a., 6, 7, 12, and 14 through 23, but shall not be subject to

Conditions 2, 3, 4b., 5, 8 through 11, and 13.




                                                   -69-
4912-4953-0001, v. 1 (30052-0001)
