     Outlook
                                                                                                05/08/2026
                                                                                                     12:26 pm
New Public Testimony
                                                                                               STATE OF HAWAII
                                                                                            LAND USE COMMISSION
From webmaster@hawaii.gov <webmaster@hawaii.gov>
Date Fri 5/8/2026 11:56 AM
To   DBEDT LUC <dbedt.luc.web@hawaii.gov>



Name

     William Haughey

Email



ZIP / Postal Code

     96756

Representing

     Self

Agenda Item

     Docket No. SP26-416 Kaawanui Solar, LLC

Position

     Support

Attachment (if any)


             SP26-416-Kaawanui-Solar-LLC-LUC-letter-of-support-05.08.25-WH.pdf


Testimony

     Please find attached written testimony in support of Docket No. SP26-416 Kaawanui Solar, LLC.
May 8th, 2026

Transmitted via email: dbedt.luc.web@hawaii.gov

William Haughey


To: The Honorable Members of the State of Hawaiʻi Land Use Commission
RE Docket: SP26-416 for Kaawanui Solar, LLC to construct and operate a solar utility
facility on lands located on the mauka side of Kaumualii Highway in Makaweli, directly
across of the Makawweli Post Office Facility, further identiﬁed as Tax Map Keys: (4)
1-7-006:006 (Por.) and 010 (Por.), and containing a project area of approximately 269
acres = KAAWANUI SOLAR LLC.


Subject: Written Testimony in Support of Land Use for the Kaawanui Solar Project

Aloha Chair and Commissioners,
I am writing to express my strong support for the approval of the land use for the proposed
Kaawanui Solar Project. This initiative represents a signiﬁcant step forward in Kauaʻi’s
ongoing commitment to clean, sustainable energy, economic growth, and environmental
stewardship. As a resident of Kauaʻi, I believe this project brings needed beneﬁts to our
community and supports local grown energy sustainability.

The Kaawanui Solar Project will provide substantial beneﬁts to our island. Over its 25-year
lifespan, it is projected to prevent the consumption of more than 179 million gallons of fuel
and avoid 2,350,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent—helping Kauaʻi meet its
renewable energy and climate goals. The project will deliver reliable power at a low, stable,
and ﬁxed price, offering energy that is less expensive than current fossil fuel prices and
providing ratepayers with long-term economic stability.

Importantly, the project supports grid stability through the construction of the new
Kaawanui Substation and the deployment of stored solar energy from the Battery Energy
Storage System (BESS) whenever needed by KIUC. This infrastructure will ensure a
resilient, modern energy grid for Kauaʻi. The Kaawanui Solar Project will generate
approximately 17.5% of Kauaʻi’s energy needs, powering the equivalent of over 16,000
homes annually with clean, locally produced energy.
Additionally, the project is expected to create signiﬁcant local economic and workforce
opportunities by providing jobs, increasing tax revenues, and driving sales of local goods
and services with an estimated economic output exceeding $200 million.

I appreciate that the project’s land use is temporary; at the end of the 25-year contract, all
infrastructure will be removed and the land will be restored to its previous or comparable
condition. This responsible approach ensures the long-term integrity and sustainability of
our island’s natural resources.

Furthermore, the project’s partnership with a local, Kauaʻi-based farming company to co-
locate agricultural activities on-site demonstrates a commitment to supporting Kauaʻi’s
100% renewable energy vision while also contributing to West Kauaʻi’s long-term food
security and agricultural vitality.

For these reasons and based on both my professional experience and my personal
connection to Kauaʻi, I believe Kaawanui Solar offers lasting beneﬁts for our island. This
project is an investment in Kauaʻi’s future—a future deﬁned by clean energy, economic
opportunity, and environmental sustainability.

Mahalo for your time, your service, and your thoughtful consideration.

Sincerely,

William Haughey



                                          -
