                                                                                                                        JOSH GREEN, M.D.
                                                                                                                        JOSH
                         STATE OF
                         STATE  OF HAWAI'I
                                   HAWAI'I                                                                                        GOVERNOR
                                                                                                                                  GOVERNOR



                         OFFICE OF
                         OFFICE OF PLANNING
                                   PLANNING                                                                                  SYLVIA LUKE
                                                                                                                               LT. GOVERNOR
                                                                                                                               LT. GOVERNOR


                         & SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT                                                                    MARY ALICE
                                                                                                                      MARY       EVANS
                                                                                                                           ALICE EVANS
                                                                                                                                   DIRECTOR
                                                                                                                                   DIRECTOR


                         235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawai'i 96813            Telephone:
                                                                                                    Telephone:                (808) 587-2846
                         Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawai'i 96804                          Fax:
                                                                                                           Fax:               (808) 587-2824
                                                                                                         Web: https://planning.hawaii.gov/
                                                                                                         Web:   https://planning.hawaii.gov/


Coastal Zone
        Zone
Management                                                                                DTS202605051009SE
                                                                                          DTS202605051009SE
Program
Program


Environmental Review
Environmental Review
                                                                  May 11,
                                                                  May 11, 2026
                                                                          2026
Program
Program                                                                                                            05/12/2026
                                  TO:
                                  TO:                   Daniel Orodenker,
                                                        Daniel Orodenker, Executive
                                                                          Executive Officer
                                                                                    Officer                               8:57 am
Land Use
     Use Commission
         Commission                                     Land Use
                                                        Land Use Commission
                                                                 Commission                                         STATE OF HAWAII
                                                                                                                 LAND USE COMMISSION
Land Use
Land Use Division
         Division
                                 FROM:
                                 FROM:                  Mary Alice
                                                        Mary Alice Evans,
                                                                   Evans, Director
                                                                          Director     MyA\«.E/Jons    Eans
Special Plans Branch
                                                        Office of
                                                        Office    Planning and
                                                               of Planning and Sustainable
                                                                               Sustainable Development
                                                                                           Development

      Transit-Oriented
State Transit-Oriented           SUBJECT:
                                 SUBJECT:               SP26-416
                                                        SP26-416
Development                                             Applicant: Kaawanui
                                                        Applicant: Kaawanui Solar,
                                                                              Solar, LLC.
                                                                                     LLC.
                                                        Request: To
                                                        Request: To Establish
                                                                    Establish aa New  Solar Energy
                                                                                 New Solar  Energy Facility
                                                                                                   Facility
                                                        Tax Map Key:
                                                                 Key: (4)
                                                                      (4) 1-7-006:006
                                                                          1-7-006:006 (por.)
                                                                                       (por.) and
                                                                                              and 010
                                                                                                  010 (por.)
                                                                                                      (por.)
Statewide Geographic
Statewide Geographic
Information System                                      Tax Map
                                                        Makaweli, Waimea,
                                                        Makaweli,  Waimea, Kauai
                                                                            Kauai
Statewide
Statewide
Sustainability Branch              The Kauai
                                   The  Kauai Planning   Commission (KPC)
                                               Planning Commission       (KPC) has
                                                                                 has approved
                                                                                      approved Kaawanui
                                                                                                  Kaawanui Solar,
                                                                                                              Solar,
                           LLC's
                           LLC     (Applicant) application
                                 ’ (Applicant)               for aa county
                                                application for     county Use
                                                                            Use Permit          county Class
                                                                                         and aa county
                                                                                 Permit and              Class IV
                                                                                                               IV
                           Zoning Permit
                           Zoning          and recommends
                                    Permit and  recommends State
                                                               State Land   Use Commission
                                                                      Land Use   Commission (LUC)(LUC) approval     of aa
                                                                                                          approval of
                           State Special
                           State  Special Permit
                                          Permit to  develop aa solar
                                                  to develop     solar energy
                                                                       energy facility
                                                                               facility and
                                                                                        and accessory
                                                                                            accessory uses
                                                                                                         uses and
                                                                                                              and
                           structures (Project)
                           structures (Project) on
                                                on approximately
                                                    approximately 269.195
                                                                     269.195 acres
                                                                               acres (Project   Site) in
                                                                                      (Project Site)  in the State
                                                                                                         the State
                           Land   Use Agricultural
                           Land Use                 District. The
                                      Agricultural District.   The Office
                                                                     Office of
                                                                            of Planning   and Sustainable
                                                                               Planning and    Sustainable
                           Development    (OPSD) supports
                           Development (OPSD)       supports the   Applicant's
                                                              the Applicant  ’ Application    for aa State
                                                                                Application for      State Special
                                                                                                            Special
                           Permit  26-416 (Application)
                           Permit 26-416   (Application) and
                                                          and recommends
                                                                recommends thatthat the LUC accept
                                                                                    the LUC    accept the  KPC's
                                                                                                       the KPC   ’
                           recommendation.
                           recommendation.

                           I.
                           I.        Applicant and the Proposed Project

                                    The Applicant
                                    The Applicant isis an
                                                       an affiliate
                                                          affiliate of  AES Clean
                                                                     of AES  Clean Energy
                                                                                     Energy Development
                                                                                              Development
                            Company, LLC
                            Company,    LLC (AES),
                                              (AES), which
                                                       which isis aa subsidiary
                                                                     subsidiary of The AES
                                                                                of The  AES Corporation.
                                                                                               Corporation. The
                                                                                                              The AES
                                                                                                                  AES
                            Corporation is
                            Corporation   is an
                                             an international
                                                international power                with aa long
                                                                        company with
                                                                power company              long history
                                                                                                 history of
                                                                                                         of
                            development
                            development andand operation
                                                operation of  solar power
                                                           of solar          electrical facilities,
                                                                      power electrical  facilities, battery
                                                                                                    battery energy
                                                                                                            energy
                            storage systems,
                            storage  systems, and
                                               and other  renewable and
                                                   other renewable      and conventional
                                                                            conventional power      generation
                                                                                            power generation
                            facilities.
                            facilities.

                                     The proposed
                                     The proposed Project will consist
                                                  Project will consist of:
                                                                       of:
                                     ••   A 52-megawatt direct
                                          A 52-megawatt          current/43 megawatt
                                                          direct current/43  megawatt alternating   current solar
                                                                                        alternating current solar
                                          photovoltaic (PV)
                                          photovoltaic       system with
                                                        (PV) system   with solar
                                                                           solar panels
                                                                                 panels and
                                                                                        and racking
                                                                                             racking system;
                                                                                                     system;
                                    ••    A 172-megawatt-hour Battery
                                          A 172                           Energy Storage
                                                                  Battery Energy   Storage System
                                                                                            System (BESS);
                                                                                                    (BESS);
                                    ••    Electrical connector
                                          Electrical           lines;
                                                     connector lines;
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
        2026
Page 2


        •   Communication equipment;
        •   An operation and maintenance shed;
        •   An AES Hawaii Substation;
                             Substation;
        •   A Kaawanui Substation and interconnection lines;
        •   Perimeter security fencing and access roads.
        The Kaawanui Substation and interconnection lines will be transferred to the Kauai
Island Utility Cooperative (KIUC), a not-for-profit organization and sole provider of electrical
power to the island. The Kaawanui Substation will be connected to KIUC's   ’ main grid and
distribute electrical power to West Kauai.
                                    Kauai.

        The Applicant and KIUC have entered into a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) which
requires approval by the Hawaii Public Utilities Commission (PUC). According to the PPA,
KIUC will purchase electrical power generated by the Project for a minimum of 25 years. The
Project is expected to generate enough clean energy to power nearly 16,000
                                                                    16,000 homes.

        The goal of the State's
                              ’ Clean Energy Initiative is to achieve 100% of its electrical needs
from renewable sources by 2045. In 2024, over 50.6% of KIUC's      ’ energy generation was from
renewable sources. The Project is expected to provide approximately 17.5% of KIUC's      ’ total
electric generation, significantly enhancing Kauai's’ attainment of the State goal. In addition to
enabling KIUC to provide lower-cost electricity to Kauai Island residents, the Project is
anticipated to reduce KIUC's ’ fossil fuel usage by over 179 million gallons over the 25-year PPA
term. Also, the Project will allow KIUC to utilize stored solar energy from the BESS at any
time, thus helping to stabilize KIUC's’ electrical grid during hours of peak demand.

II.    Project Site and Surrounding Lands

       The Project Site consists of approximately 269.195 acres spanning a portion of two
adjacent parcels, Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006
                                         1-7-006:006 (Parcel 6) and (4) 1-7-006:010
                                                                        1-7-006:010 (Parcel 10).
                                                                                            10).
Both Parcels are owned by Robinson Family Partners (REP)
                                                      (RFP) and managed by Gay & Robinson,
Inc. (G&R).

        RFP and the Applicant have an Option Agreement giving the Applicant the right to enter
        REP
into a Grant of Easement Agreement (Project GOE) covering the Project Site. The Project GOE
will allow the Applicant to use portions of the Project Site other than the common roads on an
exclusive basis to develop and operate the Project and the common roads within the Project Site
on a non-exclusive basis for access and utility purposes. The Project GOE gives the Applicant a
construction term of 3 years with the possibility of 2 extensions of 6 months each to construct the
Project and an initial operating term of 25 years and 3 extensions of 5 years each. The total term
of the Project GOE is 44 years. The Applicant will exercise the Option upon approval of the
PPA by the PUC and upon approval of all necessary discretionary and ministerial permits.
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
        2026
Page 3


        The Project Site is suited for solar energy development due to its relative flat terrain, easy
accessibility, high solar irradiance,
                          irradiance, and proximity to the existing KIUC grid infrastructure. The
main access to the Project Site will be from Kaawanui Road off the nearby Kaumualii Highway,
a State road.

       The Project Site is in the State Agricultural District, designated Agriculture in the Kauai
General Plan, and 92% of the Site is zoned Agriculture under the county zoning with the
remainder zoned Open. The Project Site is designated as Agriculture on the West Kauai
Community Plan Regional Map.

        The Project Site has historically been used for sugar cane production and livestock
pasture. Current use is for grazing cattle, sheep, and water buffalo in fenced pens and fallow
agricultural fields. Approximately 98% of the Project Area contains soils rated “"B"” under the
Land Study Bureau's  ’ (LSB) soil productivity system.

        Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 205-4.5(a)(21)     1) requires solar energy facilities on LSB
"B"-rated lands to make the area occupied by the solar project also available for compatible
“B’’
agricultural use at a lease rate of at least 50% below the fair market rate. The Applicant's   ’
Compatible Agriculture Plan (CAP) proposes to make the Project Site available for sheep
grazing, poultry production, and eventually crop production. The Applicant will not charge rent
for the compatible agricultural use of the Project Site and has designated an agricultural operator
to implement the CAP. HRS § 205-4.5(a)(21)5(a)(21) also requires the Applicant to restore the Project
Site to substantially its original condition upon the decommissioning of the Project. This will
also be required by the Project GOE.

        Surrounding uses include Kaumualii Highway and Pakala Village to the southwest and
Kaawainui Village to the northwest. The mauka areas surrounding the Project Site are former
sugar plantation lands currently used for grazing or left in open pasture.

III.   Potential Impacts

       A. Archaeological and Cultural Resources

               A series of archaeological studies of the Project Area were conducted in 2025,
                                                   (RLS), Archaeological Literature Review and
       including a Reconnaissance Level Survey (RES),
       Field Inspection and an Archaeological Inventory Survey (AIS). The RLS identified 14    14
       architectural resources, 7 of which were built in 1977 or later and are not considered
       historic properties pursuant to HRS § 6E-2. The remaining 7 are older than 50 years old
       and their significance was assessed. The RLS determined that none of the 14 resources
       met the Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) §13-284-6 significance and integrity criteria
       or are eligible for listing on the Hawaii Register of Historic Places. The AIS identified 2
       previously documented historic properties and 5 newly documented historic properties.
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11, 2026
     11,2026
Page 4


      The 6 sites were assessed as significant under the HAR §13-284-6
                                                                   13-284-6 significance criteria.
      The AIS documented the location, extent, function, age, and construction methods of the
      six historic properties in the Project Site, mitigating Project-related impacts. The AIS did
      not recommend further archaeological work, including archaeological monitoring.

             On March 6, 2026, the State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD) issued a letter
                          RLS'’s determinations, and based on the RTS
      concurring with the RTS                                       RLS and the draft AIS,
      making a determination of “"No historic properties affected"” for the Project pending
      SHPD approval of the final revisions to the AIS.

              A Cultural Impact Assessment (CIA) was conducted of the entire ahupuaa of
      Makaweli and a Ka Paakai Analysis for the Project Site in September 2025. The CIA
      reviewed the single previous cultural study of the area in the vicinity of the Project Site,
      and conducted interviews of individuals form the communities of Makaweli, Waimea,
      and Hanapepe to discuss traditional customs and practices which occurred in the area
      neighboring the Project Site. The CIA solicited comments from Native Hawaiian
      organizations, agencies, and community members, including descendants of Makaweli;
      community outreach letters were sent to 48 individuals
                                                    individuals or groups, 6 responded, one
      provided written testimony and 3 agreed to be interviewed.
                                                       interviewed. No traditional cultural
      practices were identified within the Project Site during the consultations. Consequently,
      the Ka Paakai Analysis found that the Project will not affect valued cultural, historical, or
      natural resources in the Project Site,
                                       Site, including traditional and customary Native Hawaiian
      rights.

   B. Biological Survey

               A Natural Resources Assessment (NRA) for the Project Site was conducted in
      March 2025. Flora surveys found no protected plants species. The avian field survey
      identified only one protected species, the Hawaiian Duck, but no suitable nesting habitats
      exist in the Project Site area for any endemic waterbirds. Eight species protected under
      the federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act were observed.
                                                    observed. No seabirds were recorded, but at
      least 2 species, the Hawaiian Petrel and Newell
                                                Newell's
                                                       ’ Shearwater overfly the Project Site
      during the breeding season. It is also possible that the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat
      uses resources in the Project Site area although none were detected during field surveys.
      The Applicant will take appropriate mitigation measures such as avoiding night-time
      construction, fully shielding outdoor lighting, and avoiding woody vegetation clearing
      taller than 15 feet during the bat pupping season.

  C. Wetlands, Streams, and Coastal Resources

             There are no wetlands or streams on the Project Site. The Site is in Flood Zone
      X, and not in the Special Management Area.
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
Page 5



      D. Infrastructure and Government Services

                  There is no stormwater drainage infrastructure within the Project Site. The
         Applicant will install stormwater retention features within the Project Site, and
         stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be incorporated during construction
         and operation. Potable and non-potable water for the Project will be provided by G&R
         for compatible agricultural activities, landscaping, and facility use during construction
         and operation. Electricity and telecommunications services will be provided within the
         Project Site. Wastewater generated by the Operations and Maintenance shed will be
         handled either through a septic tank or serviced by specialized sanitation crews who
         manage waste and water tanks. County fire and police services are available to the
         Project.

      E. Transportation

                 A Traffic Impact Analysis Report (TIAR) was conducted in April 2025 to assess
         potential traffic impact generated by the construction and operation of the Project. No
         significant intersection impacts were identified during the construction or operational
         phases of the Project. However, the Applicant will implement traffic mitigation measures
         such as onsite parking, off-peak deliveries,
                                          deliveries, staggered arrivals and departures, and will
         implement a Traffic Management Plan.

                  The Project Site is approximately 3.7 miles from Port Allen Airport, a State
         facility. However, the Applicant does not anticipate the Project will create any wildlife
         attractants that might create hazards to aircraft. A glare hazard analysis was completed in
         September 2025. The analysis examined that the potential for glint and glare from the
         Project's
                 ’ PV solar panels and no glare was predicted for Port Allen Airport.

IV.      OPSD Comment

         OPSD has the following comments:
         1. Finding No. 56 of the KPC Decision & Order (D&O) (pg. 14)
         1.                                                             14) states that the
            Applicant and the KIUC are awaiting PUC approval of the PPA. The LUC should
            update the record to note that the PUC issued its Decision and Order approved the
            PPA on March 2, 2026.
                              2026.

         2. Finding No. 73 of the KPC D&O (pg. 18)18) states that the Special Permit includes the
            Project improvements, including the new AES Hawaii Substation,
                                                                    Substation, but not the
            Kaawanui Substation that is already permitted in the Agricultural District pursuant to
            HRS § 205-4.5(a)(7). However, Finding No. 103 103 of the KPC D&O (pg. 28) states
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
        2026
Page 6


          that both the AES Hawaii Substation and the Kaawanui Substation are permitted uses
          pursuant to HRS § 205-4.5(a)(7). The Applicant should clarify whether the AES
                                                             Special Permit or is already a
          Hawaii Substation is required to be covered by the Special
          permitted use in the Agricultural District.

      3. Finding No. 94 of the KPC D&O (pg. 23) notes the existence of two former highway
         remnants surrounded by the land owned by RFP. A portion of one of the remnants.
                                                                                  remnants,
         Old Government Road A (Road A Section) is located between Parcel 6 and Parcel 10,10,
              RFP has agreed to buy, and the Hawaii Department of Transportation has agreed
         and REP
         to sell the remnants to RFP. The Applicant will be given a non-exclusive easement
         for access and utility purposes over Road A Section.
                                                     Section. The Applicant should confirm
         the status of the sale.

      4. Condition No. 8 of the KPC D&O (pg. 65) provides that the Applicant shall begin
         commercial operations of the Project within 4 years of the date of the LUC Decision
         and Order approving the Special Permit and that the Special Permit shall be valid for
         a period of 35 years from the start of commercial operations of the Project, subject to
         further extensions upon a timely request filed with the KPC. Finally, Condition 8
         states: “"Approval of the extensions shall not be required from the LUC."” Should the
         LUC agree to relinquish its authority to approve extensions to the Special Permit,
         OPSD recommends that a requirement be added that, in the event of the KPC
         approving an extension, the KPC will notify the LUC of its action.

      5. Condition No. 9 of the KPC D&O (pg. 65) addresses the “"State of Hawaii Office of
         Planning."” The LUC should update the record to address the “
                                                                     "State of Hawaii Office
         of Planning and Sustainable Development."”

      6. Other than the issues above, OPSD finds that the proposed solar energy facility and
         accessory uses and structures is consistent with the guidelines for determining if it
         may be permitted in the State Agricultural District as an “"unusual and reasonable use"”
         pursuant to Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 15-15-95(c):

         (I) The
         (1) The use
                 use shall
                     shall not
                           not be
                               be contrary
                                  contrary to
                                            to the
                                                the objectives
                                                    objectives sought
                                                                sought to
                                                                        to be
                                                                           be accomplished
                                                                              accomplished by
                                                                                           by
             chapters 205 and 205A,
                               205A, HRS,
                                     HRS, and the rules of  of the commission;

             The original intent of HRS Chapter 205 is “"to preserve, protect, and encourage the
             development of the lands in the State for those uses to which they are best suited
             for the public welfare."” (Act 187,
                                            187, SLH 1961) Consequently, the protection of
             agricultural land and its continued availability for agricultural use as a major
             objective of Chapter 205 should be balanced against other unusual uses that serve
             the public interest. The Project is expected to lower electricity costs to over
             16,000 homes annually and provide approximately 17.5% of KIUC's
             16,000                                                                 ’ total electric
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
Page 7


             generation, enhancing the achievement of the State's ’ goal of 100% renewable
             energy by 2045. At the same time, the land will continue to be available for
             compatible agricultural uses at no cost to users, and the land will be restored to its
             current condition upon the decommissioning of the solar energy facility.
             Consequently, OPSD finds that the need to provide a new source ofrenewable
             energy to meet Kauai Island's’ needs outweighs the potential decrease in
             agricultural production until solar energy operations cease and the land is restored
             for agricultural use.

             The Project is also not contrary to the objectives and policies of HRS Chapter
             205A as the Project Site is outside of the Special Management Area, not within a
             flood hazard zone, and the Applicant will implement drainage improvements and
             BMPs to ensure that stormwater runoff is contained onsite and does not impact
             downstream properties.

         (2) The proposed
                 proposed use would not adversely affect surrounding property;

             Surrounding properties are mostly owned by RFP. Proposed drainage
             improvements and other BMPs will prevent adverse impacts from stormwater
             runoff to neighboring agricultural uses. Other BMPs will minimize adverse
             runoff
             impacts on air quality and noise. Consequently, there would be no adverse
             impacts to surrounding properties.

         (3) The proposed
                 proposed use would not unreasonably burden public agencies to provide
             roads and streets,
                        streets, sewers,
                                 sewers, water drainage and school improvements,
                                                                   improvements, and police
             and fire protection;

            The Project will not require county water or wastewater service, nor will it expand
            the service area for police or fire protection. Stormwater retention measures will
            contain stormwater runoff. Since the Project will require limited operating and
            maintenance personnel, no adverse traffic impacts are expected. The Project will
            not create wildlife hazard attractants or create glint and glare hazards that might
            impact the nearby Port Allen Airport. OPSD notes that the Hawaii State Energy
            Office has expressed its support for the Project.

         (4) Unusual conditions,
                      conditions, trends,
                                  trends, and needs have arisen since the district boundaries
             and rules were established; and

            Hawaii and the world's’ dependency on fossilized fuels have created disastrous
            climatic and economic consequences. Climate change, and resulting sea level rise,
            has been linked to the continued release of Greenhouse Gases (GHG) into the
            atmosphere. Hawaii is the most petroleum-dependent state in the United States,
                                                                                     States,
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
Page 8


               and due to this dependency, Hawaii has the highest average electricity prices in
               the country. The Project will significantly reduce electricity costs for over 16,000
                                                                                             16,000
               homes annually and reduce KIUC's    ’ fossil fuel usage by over 179 million gallons
               over the 25-year PPA term. A GHG Analysis was conducted to quantify the
               positive impact the Project would have on the State's ’ GHG emissions. The
               Analysis estimated that the net lifecycle GHG emissions reduction resulting from
               the Project to be approximately 3,258,000 metric tons of CO?CO2 equivalent.

           (5) The
               The land
                    land upon
                         upon which
                                which the
                                      theproposed
                                          proposed use
                                                   use is
                                                       is sought
                                                          sought is
                                                                  is unsuited
                                                                     unsuitedfor
                                                                              for the
                                                                                   the uses
                                                                                       usespermitted
                                                                                            permitted
               within the district.
                          district.

               The proposed Project Site is situated primarily on land rated “"B"” under the LSB
               soil classification system and is currently in active agricultural use for grazing­
                                                                                                 —
               the proposed site is clearly suited for the agricultural uses permitted within the
               State Agricultural District. However, there are other factors to be considered:
               ••   Compatible agricultural uses will be encouraged within the Project Site
                                      OPSD notes that the Hawaii Department of Agriculture and
                    without charge. OPSD
                    Biosecurity (DAB) has assessed the feasibility of the Project's   ’ CAP and has
                    concluded that DAB “"is optimistic that ‘'compatible agricultural activity'’ will
                    occur"” within the Project Site “"and the agricultural products raised and grown
                    there will be available to Hawaii's’ markets and food service businesses."”
               ••   The Applicant is required to restore the land to its original condition for future
                    agricultural use once the solar energy facility is decommissioned.
               ••   While the Project Site is well suited for agricultural use, it is also particularly
                    well suited for solar energy use, given the relative flat terrain, high solar
                    irradiance, and proximity to the existing KIUC grid infrastructure.
                    irradiance,
              •     The Project will significantly lower electricity costs for Kauai residents,
                    reduce KIUC's ’ use of fossil fuels, reduce GHG emissions, and enhance
                    Kauai's’ achievement of the State's’ renewable energy goal.

              Given these considerations, OPSD finds that the benefit of the Project outweighs
       the temporary cost of limiting the agricultural use.

V.
V.     Recommendation
       Recommendation

       Based on the analysis above, OPSD finds that the proposed Project is an “"unusual and
reasonable use"” permitted in the State Agricultural District under HAR § 15-15-95(c) and
recommends that the LUC accept the KPC KPC's’ recommendation to approve the Application for
SP26-416.
SP26-416.
Mr. Daniel Orodenker
May 11,2026
        2026
Page 9


        Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the special permit application. If you have
any questions, please contact Aaron Setogawa, aaron.h.setogawa@hawaii.gov, (808) 587-
2883. If you wish to respond to this comment letter, please include DTS202605051009SE in the
subject line.
