                          BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION



In the Matter of the Petition of              )    DOCKET NO. SP26-416
                                              )
KA AWANUI SOLAR                               )    FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF
                                              )    LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER, AND
For Special Use Permit to Establish a Solar   )    CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
Energy Facility on Approximately 269.195      )
acre portion of land situated in Makaweli,    )
Waimea, Kaua i, Hawai i, identified by        )
Kaua i Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006       )
(por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) ("Parcel   )
10").                                         )
_____________________________________         )

   FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER
                                            AND
                                   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE




                                                  This is to certify that this is a true and correct
                                                  copy of the document on file in the office of the
                                                  State Land Use Commission, Honolulu, Hawai`i.

                                                  06/17/2026
                                                  _________________________________

                                                  BY ______________________________
                                                  DANIEL E. ORODENKER
                                                  Executive Officer
                          BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                   OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI

In the Matter of the Petition of               )   DOCKET NO. SP26-416
                                               )
KAʻAWANUI SOLAR                                )   FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF
                                               )   LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER, AND
For Special Use Permit to Establish a Solar    )   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
Energy Facility on Approximately 269.195       )
acre portion of land situated in Makaweli,     )
Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by         )
Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006        )
(por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) ("Parcel    )
10").                                          )
_____________________________________          )

   FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER
                                            AND
                                   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
                               BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                      OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI

 In the Matter of the Petition of                  )   DOCKET NO. SP26-416
                                                   )
 KAʻAWANUI SOLAR                                   )   FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF
                                                   )   LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER
 For Special Use Permit to Establish a Solar       )
 Energy Facility on Approximately 269.195          )
 acre portion of land situated in Makaweli,        )
 Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by            )
 Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006           )
 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) ("Parcel       )
 10").                                             )
 _____________________________________             )

    FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW, AND DECISION AND ORDER

        The 2026 Petition for State Special Permit SP26-416 to construct a solar energy facility

and accessory uses and structures (referred to herein as the “Project”, the “Solar Project”, or the

“facility”) on approximately 269.195 acres of land in the State Land Use Agricultural District

identified by Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006 (por.) and (4) 1-7-006:010 (por.) in

Makaweli, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, was transmitted by the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department on

May 4, 2026, pursuant to Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules (“HAR”) §15-15-95 and Hawaiʻi

Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 205-6.

        The State of Hawaiʻi Land Use Commission (“LUC” or “Commission”), having heard

and examined the testimony, exhibits, evidence, and argument of counsel and the parties present

during the May 13, 2026, hearing for Kaʻawanui Solar, LLC (“Petitioner” or “Applicant”)


SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              3
Petition, along with the pleadings and files herein, hereby makes the following Finding of Facts,

Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order.



                                           FINDINGS OF FACT

Planning Commission Procedural Matters

    1.   To the extent that any of the following Findings of Fact shall be determined to be

         Conclusions of Law, they shall be deemed as such.

    2. By letter dated January 5, 2026, the Applicant filed the Application with the County of

         Kauaʻi Planning Department, together with a Standard Zoning Permit Application,

         General Class III and IV Requirement Checklist, Process Election Form, Checklist of

         State Special Permit Application Requirements, Authorizations of Applicant, Owner and

         Lessee, Kaʻawanui Solar Project Report with digital version (CD-rom), and all required

         fees with Ka'āina S. Hull, Planning Director, Planning Department, County of Kauaʻi.

    3. By letter dated January 13, 2026, the County of Kauaʻi Planning Director found the

         Application to be complete effective January 12, 2026, and began processing the

         Application pursuant to Section 8-3.1 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance ("CZO")

         as contained in Title IV, Chapter 8 of the Kauaʻi County Code, 1987.

    4. By Notice of Public Hearing published in The Garden Island newspaper, a newspaper of

         general circulation in the County of Kauaʻi, the Planning Director provided notice to the

         public that the agency hearing with a public hearing and an opportunity for public

         testimony would be held on the Application on March 10, 2026, at 9:00 a.m. or shortly

         thereafter, at the Līhuʻe Civic Center, Moikeha Building, Meeting Room 2A-2B, 4444

         Rice Street, Līhuʻe, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             4
    5. On February 6, 2026, the Applicant mailed a Notice of Public Hearing pursuant to CZO

        Section 8-3.1(f), Section 1-13-5(d) of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of The

        Planning Commission of The County of Kauaʻi ("P.C. Rules") to 85% of owners of

        parcels located within 300 feet of Parcels 6 and 10.

    6. On February 6, 2026, the Applicant mailed an Affidavit as to Mailing of Notice to the

        Planning Director in compliance with CZO Section 8-3.1(f), the receipt of which was

        acknowledged by the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department on February 9, 2026. 6. At

        its February 24, 2026, meeting, the Planning Commission received the Planning

        Director's Report on the Application prepared in compliance with CZO Section 8-

        3.1(f)(3).

    7. At the March 10, 2026, meeting, the County of Kauaʻi Planning Commission opened and

        closed the Agency Hearing on the Application.

    8. At its March 10, 2026, meeting, the County of Kauaʻi Planning Commission approved,

        by a vote of a majority of the members of the Planning Commission, Use Permit No. U-

        2026-9 and Class IV Zoning Permit No. Z-IV-2026-12, and recommended approval of

        Special Permit No. SP-2026-4 to the State Land Use Commission, subject to the twenty-

        four (24) conditions of approval contained in their Decision and Order.



LUC Procedural Matters

    9. On April 29, 2026, the LUC emailed and mailed the Agenda for the May 13, 2026,

        hearing to the Kauaʻi and Statewide mailing lists, and the Parties; County of Kauaʻi

        Planning Department, Office of Planning and Sustainable Development (“OPSD”), and

        Petitioner.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                        5
    10. On May 1, 2026, the LUC received and made publicly available written testimony from

        Kauaʻi Community College – Applied Workforce Technology Division.

    11. On May 4, 2026, the LUC received and made publicly available the Special Permit

        Application and Exhibits 1-41 from the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department.

    12. On May 6, 2026, the LUC Staff report was posted to the Land Use Commission Website

        for public review.

    13. From May 7- 11, 2026, the LUC received and posted to the Land Use Commission

        Website for public review, four written public testimonies in support of the project.

    14. On May 12, 2026, the LUC received and posted to the Land Use Commission Website

        for public review comments from OPSD, and two written public testimonies, including

        comments from the State of Hawaiʻi Department of Agriculture and Biosecurity

        (“DAB”).

    15. On May 13, 2026, the LUC received and posted to the Land Use Commission Website

        for public review comments from the State Department of Land and Natural Resources

        State Historic Preservation Division (“SHPD”).

    16. On May 13, 2026, the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department re-filed Exhibit 29,

        Agency Comments to Planning Commission dated March 9, 2026, which LUC Staff

        stamped and posted to the LUC website for public review.

    17. On May 13, 2026, the Commission held its hybrid meeting in Kapaʻa, Kauaʻi, at the

        Hilton Garden Inn Kauaʻi Wailua Bay, Kūhiō Ballroom 3-5920 Kūhiō Highway, Kapaʻa,

        HI 96746, open to the public, to consider the Petitioner’s Petition for a Special Permit

        (“SP”) to develop and operate a utility-scale solar energy facility. The Project will

        produce approximately 43 megawatts (“MW”) alternating current (“AC”)/ 52 MW direct



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           6
         current (“DC”) of electrical power and includes a photovoltaic solar system with a battery

         energy storage system, substations, and related infrastructure to generate and supply

         renewable energy to the Kauaʻi Island Utility Cooperative (“KIUC”).

    18. Individuals representing the Parties present at the hearing in person include the following:

         Curtis Tabata, Esq., Max Graham, Esq., Megan Kane, AES Hawaiʻi, Amy Bolan, AES

         Hawaiʻi for Petitioner Kaʻawanui Solar, LLC.; Jodi Higuchi Sayegusa, Kenneth Estes,

         and Laura Barzilai, Esq. Corporation Counsel for the County of Kauaʻi Planning

         Department; Leodoloff (Leo) Asuncion and Aaron Setogawa for the OPSD.

    19. At the May 13, 2026, meeting the following Commissioners were in attendance in

         person: Brian Lee (Chairman), Nancy Carr Smith (Vice chairman), Mel Kahele, Ken

         Hayashida, and Bruce Uʻu, and in attendance online: Myles Miyasato. Commissioner

         Kūike Kamakea-‘Ohelo was excused, and Commissioner Michael Yamane was recused 1.

    20. At the May 13, 2026, hearing the LUC heard public testimony from Brad Rockwell [Tr.

         5/13/2026, pgs. 10-13] in support of the Project.

    21. At the May 13, 2026, hearing, the LUC The Commission heard presentations from the

         Applicant through Megan Kane (AES Hawaiʻi) who was sworn in [Tr. 5/13/2026, pg.15]

         and OPSD through Leo Asuncion, presented their comment letter provided to the LUC on

         May 12, 2026. Jodi Higuchi Sayegusa presented on behalf of the County of Kauaʻi

         Planning Department, and supported adoption of the Planning Commission’s Findings of

         Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order. The hearing was closed on May 13,

         2026.



1
  The transcript of the meeting identifies Commissioner Yamane as “excused”, however, at the May 14, 2026, LUC
Meeting he clarified for the record that he recused himself from the matter as he is currently a Director on the Kauaʻi
Island Utility Cooperative. Herein, Commissioner Yamane’s participation is reflected as recused.

SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                             7
    22. Following the close of the the hearing, the Commission provided a second round of

        public testimony and received no additional public testimony. There were no individuals

        present or online that wished to provide public testimony.

    23. After the Petitioner, County of Kauaʻi Planning Department, and OPSD were given the

        opportunity to provide final comments, the LUC then entered deliberation on this matter.

        Following discussion, a motion was made to approve the Ka‘awanui Solar Special Permit

        Application for solar development on approximately 269.195 acre portion of land located

        in Makaweli, Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-

        006:006 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) (“Parcel 10”), subject to the 24 County

        Conditions with the three additional Condition amendments on County conditions 2, 8,

        and 11, from the LUC Staff in the Staff Report, adopt the language in the Counties

        Decision and Order, and authorize the Chairperson to execute the order necessary to

        effectuate the Commission’s decision, subject to review and approval by the Department

        of the Attorney General. There being a vote total 6 ayes and 0 nays, one excused, one

        recused, and one vacant the motion passed. [Tr. 5/13/2026, pgs. 68-69]

FINDINGS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION ADOPTED BY LUC

Applicant/Project/Owner

    24. Applicant. The Applicant is Kaʻawanui Solar, LLC, a Delaware limited liability

        company. The Applicant has authorized Max W. J. Graham, Jr., Michael J. Belles, and

        Ian K. Jung of Belles Graham LLP, and Benjamin M. Matsubara and Curtis T. Tabata of

        Matsubara Kotake & Tabata to file this Application pursuant to the Applicant

        Authorization.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                          8
    25. AES. The Applicant is a wholly owned, single-purpose affiliate of AES Hawaiʻi, LLC,

        which is the regional operating arm of AES Clean Energy Development Company, LLC

        which is a subsidiary of The AES Corporation. The AES Corporation has a long history

        in the development and operation of solar powered electric facilities, battery energy

        storage systems and other renewable and conventional power generation facilities. The

        AES Corporation is a Fortune 500 global power company with over 37,000 MW of

        generating capacity, seven utility companies, and 19,000 employees in 17 countries.

    26. Project Site. Robinson Family Partners ("RFP") owns the Project Site, which is located in

        Makaweli, Waimea, Kauai, Hawaiʻi, identified by Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-

        006:006 ("Parcel 6") and (4) 1-7-006:010 ("Parcel 10"). RFP leases the Project Site to

        Gay & Robinson, Inc., a Hawaiʻi corporation ("G&R").

    27. Project Description. The Applicant proposes to develop the Project within Parcels 6 and

        10. The Project will be a photovoltaic solar energy facility on an approximately 269.195

        acre portion of Parcels 6 and 10, and will include the following improvements ("Project

        Improvements"): a solar photovoltaic (PV) system with solar panels and racking system;

        power conversion stations; a Battery Energy Storage System ("BESS"); a network of

        electrical collector lines; communications equipment; an Operations & Maintenance

        Shed; an AES Hawaiʻi Substation; a Kaʻawanui Substation and interconnection lines

        (which will be transferred to KIUC); fencing; and access roads. RFP and G&R have

        agreed to grant the Applicant an option to acquire an easement ("Project Easement") to

        use: the portions of the Project Site other than the common roads on an exclusive basis to

        develop and operate the Project; and the common roads within the Project Site on a non-

        exclusive basis for access and utility purposes.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           9
    28. Authorization. RFP has authorized Applicant to file this Application pursuant to the

        Landowner Authorization. G&R has authorized the Applicant to file this Application

        pursuant to the Lessee Authorization.



Location and Land Use Designation

    29. Location. The Project Site is located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi. The Project

        Site is located in the ahupuaʻa of Makaweli.

    30. SLUC. The Project Site is located in the SLUC Agricultural District.

    31. Kauaʻi General Plan. The Project Site is subject to the provisions of the Kauaʻi Kā Kou

        (Kauaʻi County General Plan) ("Kauaʻi General Plan").

    32. CZO. The Project Site is located primarily in the CZO Agriculture District, although a

        small portion of the Project Site along its southern side (along the Kaʻawanui Gulch) is

        also located in the CZO Open District.

    33. Development Plan Area. The Project Site is located within the West Kauaʻi Community

        Plan ("WKCP") Area. The Project Site has been designated Agriculture on the WKCP

        Regional Map.

    34. CZMA/Special Management Area. As set forth in Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes ("HRS")

        Chapter 205A (Part I), all lands in the State of Hawaiʻi, including the Project Site, are

        located in the Coastal Zone Management Area ("CZMA") and are subject to the

        objectives and policies of the Coastal Zone Management Program ("CZMP"), as

        described in HRS Section 205A-2. None of the Project Site is located within the Special

        Management Area ("SMA") of the County of Kauaʻi.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            10
    35. Violations. There are no existing violations of any land use laws or regulations on the

        Project Site. 23. Land Use Conditions. RFP is in the process of purchasing Old

        Government Road A from the State of Hawaiʻi, a portion of which (the "Road A

        Section") is located within the Project Site. The sale is subject to a condition requiring the

        Road A Section to be consolidated into Parcel 10. The Project Site is not subject to any

        other land use conditions.

    36. Important Agricultural Lands. The Project Site has not been designated as Important

        Agricultural Lands ("IAL") pursuant to HRS Chapter 205, Part III.



Past, Existing, And Proposed Used of Project Site

    37. Past and Existing Uses. In the past the Project Site has been used for agricultural

        purposes, including sugar cane cultivation, and for cattle and livestock pasture purposes.

        The Project Site has been used most recently for the grazing of cattle, sheep, and water

        buffalo within fenced pens.

    38. Proposed Project. The Applicant is proposing to develop the Project on the Project Site.

    39. Solar PV System/Power Conversion/Electrical Collection. The Project will be located on

        the Project Site as shown on the Site Development Plan Set. It will consist of an

        approximately 52 megawatt Direct Current (MW DC)/43 megawatt Alternating Current

        (MW AC) ground mounted solar photo-voltaic ("PV") system, coupled with a 172 MWh

        Battery Energy Storage System (BESS), and related interconnection and ancillary

        facilities. The Project will consist of solar panels mounted on single-axis trackers, which

        will rotate along a fixed horizontal axis from east to west as the sun moves across the sky,

        increasing the efficiency of the system as opposed to a traditional fixed-tilt system. The



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             11
        solar panels, racking system, and other equipment. The Project will include solar panels,

        which will produce direct current electricity. The output of the solar panels will be

        directed to central inverters, which will convert the electricity from direct current to

        alternating current. The inverters will be connected to step-up transformers to convert the

        inverter output to medium voltage.

    40. Substations. All of the power generated by the Project will be directed to a new

        substation ("AES Hawaiʻi Substation") and then to the BESS or the Kaʻawanui

        Substation. The BESS will be located adjacent to the AES Hawaiʻi Substation and be

        used to store the electrical power. A generator step-up transformer will convert the

        medium voltage to transmission voltage to interconnect with the adjacent Kaʻawanui

        Substation. The Kaʻawanui Substation will be constructed by the Applicant at the same

        time as the Project, and will be located on an approximately two (2) acre portion of

        Parcel 10. The AES Hawaiʻi Substation will be located immediately adjacent to the

        Kaʻawanui Substation and will be connected via an underground line. Upon completion

        of construction, the Applicant will transfer the Kaʻawanui Substation to KIUC, and RFP

        will convey an easement over the Kaʻawanui Substation portion of Parcel 10 to KIUC.

    41. Utility Poles/Lines. Shield wire metal masts will be installed in the AES Hawaiʻi

        Substation (45 feet tall) and the Kaʻawanui Substation (60-70 feet tall) to protect

        equipment. The Kaʻawanui Substation will be connected to the main KIUC grid on

        Kaumuali'i Highway through interconnection lines located on steel poles (60-70 feet tall).

    42. Support Facilities. The Project will include the following support facilities.

    43. Operations and Maintenance Shed. An Operation and Maintenance Shed ("O&M Shed")

        will be constructed adjacent to the AES Hawaiʻi Substation. It will be a twelve (12)-foot-



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           12
        high building measuring 20 feet by 42 feet and will be used for office purposes, remote

        site monitoring, equipment, and storage. The shed will use electricity from the station

        service line for climate control and lighting. Lavatories for the shed will either be

        connected through private domestic water connections and a septic tank or serviced by

        specialized sanitation crews who will manage waste and water tanks and perform routine

        maintenance.

    44. Communication Equipment. Additional communication connections and equipment will

        be installed to interface with KIUC's supervisory control and data acquisition

        ("SCADA") system so that the energy generated by the Project can be remotely

        controlled and dispatched by KIUC. The Project will include an energy management

        system ("EMS") that will: allow all operations to be supervised and all system functions

        to be protected in response to real-time dispatch signals from KIUC; and will report

        production data, energy forecasts, and other system health data.

    45. Fencing/Roads. The Project Site will be surrounded by seven (7) foot high chain link

        security fence. There will be a buffer around the outside of the security fence, and there

        will be access roads (including the Common Roads) throughout the Project Site, which

        will allow for convenient access and navigation within the Project Site to all major

        equipment.

    46. General Dimensions. The Project Improvements will have the following dimensions.

    47. Solar Panels. The proposed ground mounted solar panels will be on a single-axis tracking

        system, which will tilt the panels along a horizontal axis to follow the sun as it moves

        across the sky from east to west. The average height of the Solar Panels will be five (5)

        feet off the ground at a stow position where the panels are flat. As they rotate, their



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             13
        highest point will reach eight (8) feet high. Given the height of the panels, there will be

        room for people to move under and around the system with ease.

    48. BESS. The BESS Containers will be ten (10) feet in height, eight (8) feet in width, and

        twenty (20) feet in length. The BESS Containers will include the lithium-ion battery

        modules. In addition, each BESS Container will have several layers of protection to avoid

        failures and to contain hazards in the event of a failure. There will be forty-four (44)

        BESS Containers located adjacent to the AES Hawaiʻi Substation.

    49. Development/Construction. Petitioner estimates it may take from 6 to 18 months after

        approval of this Application by the Planning Commission and SLUC to finalize

        engineering and design and obtain necessary ministerial permits. Thereafter, actual

        construction is estimated to take 16 to 24 months, with final Testing to take 8 to 12

        months. The target commercial operating date is estimated to be in 2028.

    50. Plans. The Applicant will develop a Health, Safety and Security Plan, an Environmental

        Compliance Plan, and an Emergency Response Plan.

    51. Staging Area. The Project Site will be grubbed and graded as necessary. During

        construction, approximately nine (9) acres within the Project Site will be utilized for one

        or more Staging Areas.

    52. Delivery of Materials. The Project materials and equipment will be delivered to the

        Project Site and held in the Staging Areas.

    53. Construction. The Project will be constructed.

    54. BMPs. Following construction, all disturbed areas will be re-vegetated and where

        necessary protected by Best Management Practices ("BMPs").




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              14
    55. Land Coverage. Pursuant to CZO Sections 8-8.2(a) and 8-4.3, the allowable land

        coverage in the CZO Agriculture District is 60% of lot or parcel area and the allowable

        land coverage in the CZO is 10% of lot or parcel area. The solar panels will be elevated

        on structural posts, minimizing new impervious area. The proposed development will add

        approximately nine and 842/1000 (9.842) acres of new impervious surface on Parcel 10

        and on Parcel 6. The Parcel 10 Project Improvements will consist of the solar panel

        mounting posts, the AES Hawaiʻi Substation, the Kaʻawanui Substation, the O&M Shed,

        transformer pads, BESS Blocks, inverters, transformers, and fence posts. The Parcel 6

        Project Improvements will include the solar panel mounting posts, transformer pads, and

        fence posts. The allowable land coverage in Parcel 10 is 95.25 acres, and the allowable

        land coverage in Parcel 6 is 2,908.794 acres. As a result, the allowable land coverage on

        the Project Site will not be exceeded.

    56. Landscaping. Because of the existing vegetative screening adjacent to Kaumualiʻi

        Highway and elsewhere on the Project Site, the Project will only be partially visible from

        Kaumualiʻi Highway. The Applicant will preserve this existing vegetation. In addition, to

        further mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping will be installed and maintained around

        the Project Site.

    57. Compatible Agriculture. HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21) allows solar energy facilities on

        lands with overall (master) productivity rating B (as is the case of the Project Site)

        provided that, among other things, the area occupied by the solar project is also made

        available for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least 50% below

        the fair market rent for comparable lands. As described in the Compatible Agricultural

        Plan, the Applicant proposes to make the Project Site available for sheep grazing, poultry



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              15
        production, and eventually crop production. The agricultural operator will be Kawailana,

        Inc. The Applicant will not charge Kawailana, Inc. rent for the use of the Project Site.

    58. Operation. After construction and commissioning, the system will operate with minimal

        servicing and maintenance.

    59. Monitoring. The Applicant will have 3 to 4 employees on site on a daily basis. In

        addition, metering equipment will send performance and production data to continuously

        monitored servers. The Applicant's software will notify its Operations & Maintenance

        team if the system is underperforming. The Applicant will have dedicated employees

        monitoring the Project twenty-four (24) hours per day seven (7) days per week, including

        an operator on island.

    60. Noise. During operation, the solar panels will be silent. As discussed herein in Section

        6.3, the BESS, inverters and transformers are also very quiet, emitting less than thirty-

        eight (38) a-weighted decibels (dBA) at 100 meters, which is approximately the loudness

        of a conversation.

    61. Lighting. Permanent lighting may be required for the Project for site security. Any onsite

        lighting will be motion sensor-activated as well as angled downward and shielded to

        avoid excess light or glare beyond the Project Site boundary. All lighting requirements

        will be met by using LED lights.

    62. Emergency Response Plan. The Applicant will implement an Emergency Response and

        Communication Plan to address emergency situations that may arise at the Project Site.

    63. Decommissioning. Following the life and operation of the Project under the Project GOE,

        the Applicant will remove the solar energy facility which includes the following: (1) solar

        panels and racking system, including steel posts, (2) power conversion stations (3)



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            16
        BESSs, including battery units and battery modules, inverters and transformers, and other

        auxiliary equipment (4) AES Hawaiʻi Substation and related components including

        communication, operations, and security equipment, (5) electrical wiring and

        connections, and (6) fencing and gates. The Applicant will cover up all pit holes,

        trenches, other borings, or excavations; reseed the soil with appropriate grass seed if

        necessary; and will otherwise return the land to substantially the same condition as its

        original condition. The Applicant will provide proof of financial security to

        decommission the facility as required by HRS §205-4.5(a)(21).

    64. Grid Stability. The proposed Project will provide approximately 17.5% of KIUC's total

        electric generation. One of its key benefits will be to improve electric grid stability by

        enabling KIUC to utilize stored solar energy from the BESS to be dispatched at any time

        KIUC desires. This will help KIUC to meet its evening peak demand, along with other

        supporting ancillary services on the grid. KIUC intends to use the stored energy in the

        BESS system to: (1) provide energy as the sun sets and into the evening to offset KIUC's

        evening peak demand; (2) provide energy in the morning to offset KIUC's morning peak;

        and (3) respond to low-frequency events by supplying additional power automatically, all

        of which will help KIUC reduce its dependence on more expensive and inefficient

        conventional oil-fired units. It is anticipated the Project will reduce KIUC's fossil fuel

        usage by over 179 million gallons over the 25-year PPA term (Exhibit 2, pg.17).

    65. Green Energy. The Project will also provide benefits to human health and environment

        through the use of an alternative "green" energy source that does not generate greenhouse

        gases and does not result in water contamination or other environmental impacts often

        associated with fossil fuel production. KIUC and its members/customers will use



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             17
        approximately 7,150,000 fewer gallons of oil annually (Exhibit 2, pg.17). The amount of

        clean renewable green energy expected to be generated from the Project per year is

        enough to power almost 16,000 homes (Exhibit 2, pg.17). The energy generated will also

        assist KIUC in achieving the State of Hawaiʻi's Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), as

        set forth in HRS §269-91 et seq. and its own more ambitious goal of 100% renewable

        RPS by 2033.

    66. Public Benefits. The construction and maintenance of the system will benefit the public

        as a whole and support the local economy by: increasing tax revenues; providing jobs;

        and increasing the sale of local goods and services. The Project will deliver power at a

        low, fixed price over its 25-year lifespan at a cheaper cost than current fossil fuel prices.

    67. Federal Solar Tax Credit. Between July 2024, when the Applicant bid this Project to

        KIUC, and December 2025, federal legislation and rulemaking have created an

        unprecedented urgency to bring solar projects online. Under current rules, the Applicant

        must place the Project into service no later than December 31, 2029, to qualify for the

        federal solar tax credits assumed in the PPA price negotiated with KIUC. These federal

        tax credits allow the Applicant to sell energy to KIUC at a lower rate, which KIUC can

        then pass along to its members. The Project schedule currently targets commercial

        operation in 2028, but any permitting delay could have compounding effects on the

        Project schedule and jeopardize obtaining the federal tax credits.

    68. PPA. The Applicant and KIUC have entered into a Power Purchase Agreement, which

        has been approved by the Hawaiʻi Public Utilities Commission ("PUC"), through its

        Decision and Order issued on March 2, 2026. By its terms, KIUC will purchase the

        electrical power generated by the Project for a minimum of twenty-five (25) year period.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            18
    69. GOE/Option. RFP and Petitioner have executed an Option Agreement that provides

        Petitioner the right to enter into a Grant of Easement Agreement (the "Project GOE")

        covering the Project Site. The Project GOE will grant Petitioner: a Construction Term of

        three (3) years and two (2) extensions of the Construction Term for six (6) months each

        to construct the Project; an initial Operating Term of 25 years; and three (3) extensions of

        the Operating Term of five (5) years each. The total term of the Project GOE will be

        forty-four (44) years. The Applicant will exercise the Option upon approval of the PPA

        by the PUC and upon approval of all necessary discretionary and ministerial permits.



Description of Project Site and Identification of Surrounding Lands

    70. Adjacent Property. Parcels 6 and 10 are located adjacent to, or within 300 feet of, the

        properties identified on the Adjacent Property Index.

    71. Natural Environment. The Project Site is composed of gently sloping lands (4%) in an

        area generally lying east of Waimea Town, and north (mauka) of Kaumualiʻi Highway.

        The Project Site is located approximately 20 feet to 215 feet above sea level. The Project

        Site is gentle sloping in a mauka to makai direction. The Project Site is currently used for

        agricultural purposes. Most of the Project Site consists of open areas. The Aʻakuki

        Stream and Kekupua Valley run along the northern boundary of the Project Site. The

        Kaʻawanui Gulch runs along the southern boundary of the Project Site.

    72. Soils/Survey Map. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture ("USDA") Soil

        Survey Geographic ("SSURGO") database (2001) and soil survey data gathered by Foote

        et al. (1972), the soils in the Project Site consist of:

             a. Makaweli stony silty clay loam (0-6%) (MhB).



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                          19
             b. Makaweli stony silty clay loam (6-12% slope) (MhC).

             c. Makaweli stony silty clay loam (0-6% slope) (MgB).

             d. Nonopahu clay (2-10% slope) (NnC).

             e. Rough broken land (rRR).

             f. Dune land (DL).

    73. Land Study Bureau. Lands in Hawaiʻi have been classified in a five-class productivity

        rating system using the Letters A, B, C, D and E where A represents the class of highest

        productivity and E the lowest. As shown on the Detailed Land Classification Map (Island

        of Kauaʻi) (Land Study Bureau, University of Hawaiʻi), the Over-all Productivity Rating

        for most of the lands within the Project Site is Class B. The Project Site is also designated

        as Agricultural Lands Important to the State of Hawaiʻi ("ALISH").

    74. Rainfall. The Project Site receives approximately 21 inches of annual rainfall.

    75. Biological Resources. AECOS Inc. has prepared a Natural Resources Assessment for The

        Proposed Kaʻawanui Project (October 30, 2025) which describes the biological resources

        on the Project Site ("AECOS Report"). The AECOS Report has been further

        supplemented by a Hawaiʻi Gap Analysis Project Land Cover and Vegetation Map.

    76. Jurisdictional Waters. None of the water features on the Project Site (irrigation ditches,

        streams and gulches) are subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

    77. Flora. The Project Site is pastureland dominated by grasses. A total of 97 species of

        plants (including 6 indigenous and 3 early Polynesia species) were identified but none are

        listed as threatened or endangered under state or federal law.

    78. Avian. A total of 25 species of birds were recorded in the avian survey, of which one

        (Hawaiian duck) is a listed species under federal and state of Hawaiʻi endangered species



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             20
        statutes. Two other species (Black-crowned Night Heron and Pacific Golden-Plover) are

        native but not endangered or threatened. No suitable nesting habitats exist on the Project

        Site for any endemic waterbirds. As a result, the proposed Project will not impact listed

        waterbird species.

    79. Mammalian. All other vertebrates observed are non-native. However, it is possible that

        the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus semotus) uses resources in the

        area. Adverse impacts to Hawaiian hoary bat can be avoided or minimized by not

        clearing woody vegetation taller than 4.6 m (15 feet) between June 1 and September 15,

        the bat pupping season, and by avoiding the use of barbed wire for project fencing, which

        the Project will implement during construction and operations.

    80. Flood Hazard. According to the Federal Insurance Rate Maps (1500020259G and

        1500020267F), the Project Site is located in Flood Zone X, which is an area determined

        to be outside of the 500-year flood plain. 2

    81. Water Resources. The Project will utilize an existing private, potable, and agricultural

        water system for potable and agricultural water purposes. This use will have no

        significant impact on Groundwater Resources. In addition, the Project will not withdraw

        water from, and will have no impact on, any streams in the vicinity.

    82. Wildfire Hazard. The Applicant will incorporate multiple layers of fire prevention and

        suppression measures to enhance the safety of the Project Site and adjacent lands.




2
 Exhibit 41 the County of Kauaʻi Planning Commission Decision and Order FOF 68 refers to Federal Insurance
Rate Maps (Map No. 1500020258G and Map No. 1500020259G), however, FOF 82 refers to Flood Insurance Rate
Maps 1500020259G and 1500020267F, the inconsistency resulted in LUC Staff amending FOF 80 to reflect Flood
Insurance Rate Maps 1500020259G and 1500020267F.

SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 21
Permits Requested and Required

    83. Use Permit. The construction of the Project will take place primarily within the CZO

        Agriculture District, although a small portion will be located in the CZO Open District.

        For purposes of the CZO, the Project Improvements, including the AES Hawaiʻi

        Substation (but not the Kaʻawanui Substation), constitute a "Solar Energy Facility".

        Conversely, the Kaʻawanui Substation is defined as a "public utilities facility" under the

        CZO. In both cases, however, the uses require a Use Permit for uses in the CZO

        Agriculture District pursuant to CZO Sections 8-2.4(r)(22), (s)(16) and (s)(21) and in the

        CZO Open District pursuant to CZO Sections 8-2.4(u)(14) and (u)(15). Therefore, the

        Applicant has requested that the Planning Commission issue a Use Permit pursuant to

        CZO Section 8-3.2 for the construction of the Project (including the Kaʻawanui

        Substation). The Applicant filed a Standard Zoning Permit Application in support of this

        Use Permit request.

    84. Class IV Zoning Permit. The Project (including the Kaʻawanui Substation) requires the

        issuance of a Class IV Zoning Permit as a condition of the Use Permit approval pursuant

        to CZO Section 8-8.4(4). The Applicant filed a General Class III & IV Zoning

        Requirement Checklist in support of this Class IV Zoning Permit request.

    85. Special Permit. A SLUC Special Permit as described in HRS Section 205-6 and Hawaiʻi

        Administrative Rules ("HAR") Title 15, Subtitle 3, Chapter 15, Subchapter 12, is

        required pursuant to HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21) for the portions of the proposed Project

        which are considered to be a "Solar Energy Facility". This would include all of the

        Project Improvements, including the AES Hawaiʻi Substation, but not the Kaʻawanui

        Substation. The Kaʻawanui Substation is a permitted use under HRS Section 205-



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           22
        4.5(a)(7), which allows "Public…utility lines and roadways, transformer stations…or

        other similar structures…", and is not subject to the Special Permit requirement. The

        Applicant filed a Checklist of State Special Permit Application Requirements in support

        of this Special Permit request.



Impacts of Development

    86. Botanical Resources and Wildlife. The existing state of botanical resources and wildlife

        have been heavily compromised by past and present agricultural uses on the Project Site.

        As a result, there do not appear to be any mammalian or avian species or botanical

        resources that will be endangered by the Project.

    87. Flora. The habitat currently present on the Project Site is comprised of improved and

        unimproved lands which have been used for various agricultural purposes since the

        closure of sugarcane operations in the area. The vegetation is dominated almost to the

        exclusion of native species by alien introduced grasses and weedy species. Native taxa

        comprise 6 indigenous and 3 Early Polynesian ("canoe plants") species, representing only

        9% of the total plant species identified.

    88. Mammalian. Terrestrial mammals present on the Project Site and within the vicinity are

        likewise alien species. There is the possibility that the endemic endangered Hawaiian

        hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus semotus) overflies the Project Site and possibly forages for

        insects on a seasonal basis above the Project Site.

    89. Avifauna. A total of 25 species of birds were recorded of which one (the Hawaiian duck)

        is listed under federal and state of Hawaiʻi endangered species statutes. Two other species

        (Black-crowned Night Heron and Pacific Golden-Plover) are native but not endangered



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           23
        or threatened. No suitable nesting habitats exist on the Project Site for any endemic

        waterbirds. Four species, Rose-ringed Parakeet (Psittacula krameria), a Common Myna

        (Acridotheric tristis), Common Waxbill (Estrilda astrild), and Red Junglefowl (Gallus

        gallus) accounted for 51% of the total number of birds recorded during the field survey.

        The remaining 22 species recorded are all alien to the Hawaiian Islands. Eight of the

        species are protected under the federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act. The avian diversity

        and densities observed during the survey were consistent with the environment at the

        Project Site and with current usage at this elevation range on the Island of Kauaʻi. No

        seabirds were recorded during the surveys, but at least two listed seabird species -

        Hawaiian Petrel (Pterodroma sandwichensis) and Newell's Shearwater (Puffinus newelli)

        - may overfly the Project Site during the breeding season.

    90. Historical Resources. The Project Site has been heavily disturbed by past and present

        agricultural activities. As a result, with the exception of the post-contact Historic

        Properties identified in the Reconnaissance Level Survey prepared by Mason Architects

        (September 2025) ("Mason RLS"), the Archaeological Literature Review And Field

        Inspection (Bautista, et.al., September 2025) ("LRFI"), and the Archaeological Inventory

        Survey Of 268.4 Acres For The Proposed Kaʻawanui Project (Hallett H. Hammatt, PhD,

        et.al./Cultural Surveys Hawaiʻi, Inc./September 2025) ("AIS") (collectively, the

        "Archaeological Studies"), there do not appear to be any pre-contact archaeological,

        cultural or historical resources on the surface of the Project Site in which the Project will

        take place which will be affected by the Project.

    91. Historic Properties. The following historic properties were identified in the AIS:

             a. SHPD# 50-30-09-02269 (historic plantation ditch system).



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            24
             b. SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-3 (historic Old Government Road).

             c. SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-4 (historic Kaʻawanui Village Road).

             d. SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-5 (historic Plantation Road).

             e. SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-6 (railroad track remnant).

             f. SHPD# 50-30-09-CSH-7 (historic water tank facility).

    92. HICRIS. The Project was initiated in the Hawaiʻi Cultural Resource Information System

        ("HICRIS") on April 25, 2025, and assigned as Project Number 2025PR00506. In the

        event of an inadvertent discovery of a historic site or burial in the future, the Applicant

        will immediately contact SHPD.

    93. Air Quality/Noise. The Project will have little or no impact on the air quality and ambient

        noise levels in the area. Air quality and ambient noise levels may be affected at a very

        minimal level during the Project construction activities. All vehicles or equipment used

        by the Applicant during construction will be properly muffled, housed, and maintained to

        reduce any noise impacts or emission impacts. The Environmental Protection Agency

        ("EPA") and State of Hawaiʻi air quality standards will not be exceeded.

    94. Flooding and Drainage. The Project Site is situated within Flood Zone X (Areas outside

        of 500 year flood plain), as shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps 1500020259G and

        1500020267F. The Project will meet all of the requirements of the Flood Plain

        Management Ordinance of the County of Kauaʻi, as contained in Chapter 15, Article 1, of

        the Kauaʻi County Code, 1987. The Project will have no impact on flooding on or around

        the Project Site. All drainage resulting from the Project will be retained on site and

        subject to best management practices.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              25
    95. Water. The Project will obtain potable water and agricultural water from an existing

        private water system located mauka of Kaumualiʻi Highway. Use of this system will have

        no significant impact on groundwater resources.

    96. Electric/Communications. Electricity and telecommunication services for the Project will

        all be within the Project Site and either connect to existing service lines or be delivered

        along the same route as the new Project Interconnection Line. The storage containers will

        utilize electricity provided through the station service line for climate control and

        lighting, and communication equipment will be installed in the AES Hawaiʻi Substation

        and throughout the facility for operations and security purposes. There will be no impacts

        associated with these new connections.

    97. Wastewater Treatment and Disposal. The County of Kauaʻi Public Works – Wastewater

        Management Division operates Kauaʻi’s wastewater infrastructure, and the wastewater

        system does not currently service the Project Site. Lavatories for the O&M shed will

        either have a septic tank or be serviced by specialized sanitation crews who will manage

        waste and water tanks and perform routine maintenance.

    98. Solid Waste Disposal. Solid waste collection will be provided by private means. During

        construction, all waste will be temporarily stored onsite and periodically transported by

        the construction contractor for recycling or disposal at Kekaha Landfill. During

        decommissioning, if necessary and as required, components that cannot be reused,

        salvaged, recycled, or repurposed will be disposed of off-island at an authorized solid

        waste facility or landfill. In total, the construction, operation, and decommissioning of the

        Project are not expected to generate significant new demand for solid waste management

        services.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              26
    99. Fire and Police Services. Fire and police services in the vicinity are located in Waimea,

        approximately 3.2 miles (Fire) and 3.6 miles (Police) from the Project Site. The Project

        will not significantly increase the need for existing fire and police services.

    100.         Schools. The closest schools are Eleele Elementary School in Eleele, Waimea

        Canyon Middle School and Waimea High School in Waimea, and Kekaha Elementary

        School, Kula Aupuni Niihau A Kahelelani Charter School, and Ke Kula Niʻihau O

        Kekaha Charter School in Kekaha. The Project will not generate any additional

        enrollment.

   101. Economics. The Project will have the beneficial economic impacts described in the

       Economic Impact Analysis.

    102. Housing. The Project will not result in the need for any Workforce Housing units.

    103. Property Values. Since the fair market value of real property is based on the value of the

           land and physical improvements, the completion of the Project will increase the value of

           the Project Site. This may result in increased real property taxes on the Project Site,

           subject to any exemptions available for commercial alternative energy facilities

           contained in Section 5A-11.30 of the Kauaʻi County Code, 1987. However, it will not,

           in and of itself, have a material impact on the value of, or real property taxes assessed

           against, surrounding properties.

    104. Population. The Project will not result in any significant increase in population on

           Kauaʻi.

    105. Traffic Circulation. The major roads which serve the Project Site are: Kaumualiʻi

           Highway (a State highway) to the southwest (makai); remnants of the Kauaʻi Belt

           Highway (a State road); and private, improved roads located within the Project Site. As



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                               27
          discussed in the Traffic Impact Analysis Report, the Project, in and of itself, will not

          significantly increase traffic on Kaumualiʻi Highway.

    106. Road Remnants. Located mauka of Kaumualiʻi Highway, between Hanapepe Town and

          the Waimea River, and surrounded by lands owned by RFP (including certain Robinson

          Family Members), are two former highway remnants owned by the State of Hawaiʻi.

          These remnants are identified as Old Government Road A and Old Government Road B

          (the "Remnants"). A portion of Old Government Road A ("Road A Section") is located

          between Parcel 6 and Parcel 10. RFP has agreed to buy, and the State of Hawaiʻi,

          through its Department of Transportation ("HDOT"), has agreed to sell to RFP, the

          Remnants, including the Road A Section. The Project GOE will provide Applicant with

          a non-exclusive easement for access and utility purposes over the Road A Section, as

          well as the Road to Parcel 11 and Kaʻawanui Village Road.

    107. Heritage Resources. As shown on the West Kauaʻi Heritage Resource Map (Figure 5-9

          of the Kauaʻi General Plan) and as discussed in the View Study, the Project will not

          have an impact on the historic resources within the Project Site. The proposed Project

          will be located on a relatively level portion of the Project Site. With current and

          proposed screening vegetation, the Project will be substantially screened from public

          roads. 3

    108. Airports. The Project Site is located approximately 3.7 miles from the Port Allen Airport

          (a State facility) and 10.6 miles from the Barking Sands Airport (a U.S. Navy facility).

          The Project Site is not located near or beneath any flight paths for these airports.


3
 Exhibit 41 the County of Kauaʻi Planning Commission Decision and Order FOF 111 identifies historic, cultural, or
archeological resources on the property, are related to plantation era improvements, however, FOF 95 states “there
are no historic resources noted within the Project Site”, the inconsistency resulted in LUC Staff amending the LUC’s
FOF 107 to reflect the historic resources would not be impacted per the Counties FOF 111.

SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                         28
    109. FAA/Wildlife. The U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration

         ("FAA") has issued an Advisory Circular (ACNO: 150/5200-33b) entitled Hazardous

         Wildlife Attractants On or Near Airports. This Advisory Circular provides guidance on

         certain land uses that have the potential to attract hazardous wildlife (avian species)

         within a five (5) mile range of any airports (referred to as "Air Operation Areas" or

         "AOA"). Because the Project is located within the five (5) mile range of the Port Allen

         airport, it is subject to the Advisory Circular. The Applicant does not anticipate that the

         Project will attract any more wildlife than is already present on the Project Site in its

         current condition. It should be noted that "photovoltaic and solar farms" are not among

         the enumerated land-use practices in the Advisory Circular that have the potential for

         attracting hazardous wildlife.

    110. OP TAM. As discussed in the Glare Hazard Analysis, the Project will create minimal

         glare impacts. The State Office of Planning and Sustainable Development has issued

         Technical Assistance Memorandum TAM-2016-1 ("TAM") pursuant to FAA Order

         5190.6B. The TAM discusses the State's obligation to restrict land uses adjacent to or in

         the immediate vicinity of airports (which have received federal funds) to activities and

         purposes compatible with normal airport operations. The TAM adopts the five (5) mile

         range (discussed above in the Advisory Circular) in evaluating adjacent land uses. One

         of the concerns is the ocular impact (referred to as "Glint/Glare") of solar panels on

         aircraft use, especially as solar facilities are being incorporated into current airport

         operations. As discussed in the FAA Technical Guidance for Evaluating Selected Solar

         Technologies On Airports (Report No. FAA-ARP-TR-10-1), the primary concern is that

         light reflection (Glint/Glare) from solar facilities does not cause the temporary loss of



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             29
         vision to pilots on arrival or departure from airports, or to Air Traffic Control personal in

         the control tower. This concern affects solar facilities located adjacent to or near the

         AOA (i.e., within the 5 miles range) or within the flight paths for the airport.

    111. Glint/Glare. Because the Project is located within the 5 mile range of the Port Allen

         airport, it will need to address Glint/Glare issues. As discussed in the Glare Hazard

         Analysis, the Solar Panels which will be used for the Project are designed to minimize

         reflection and maximize the absorption of light. The solar arrays will be mounted on

         solar trackers which are aligned in a north to south direction and which move with the

         sun to maximize absorption and minimize reflection. The Project will comply with all

         applicable Glint/Glare requirements.

    112. Chemicals and Fertilizers. A limited area (1.5-acre area) along the southern boundary of

         the Project Site has been used for truck parking and miscellaneous farm equipment

         storage. Based on the types of farm equipment and the Project Site's historical use,

         combined with inspections of several containers, it is reasonably believed that these

         containers currently or formerly held hazardous substances, including petroleum

         products. The drums that did have labels were typically labeled “used oil”. All

         miscellaneous farming equipment currently stored at the Project Site will be removed

         before construction begins.

Land Use Commission Considerations

   113. Compliance with SLUC Agricultural District Standards. The proposed uses include the

       development of: solar energy facilities (within B rated lands); and utilities. The AES

       Hawaiʻi Substation and the Kaʻawanui Substation are permitted uses pursuant to HRS

       Section 205-4.5(a)(7). The remainder of the Project is a use under HRS Sections 205-



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            30
       2(d)(6)(B) and 205-4.5(a)(21) which may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a Special

       Permit pursuant to HRS Section 205-6. The Applicant will satisfy the special provisions

       applicable to solar energy facilities.

   114. Agricultural Activities. As discussed in the Agricultural Plan, the Applicant will lease the

       usable portions of the Project Site for Agricultural Activities at rates which are at least

       50% below the fair market rental value.

   115. Decommissioning. The Applicant will provide such security as required by HRS §205-

       4.5(a)(21)to insure the decommissioning and removal of the solar energy facility at the

       end of the lease term. The Kaʻawanui Substation is not subject to the decommissioning

       requirement and will not be removed, as it will continue to be owned and operated by

       KIUC as part of its island-wide grid system.

   116. Compliance with State Plan. The proposed Project complies with the State Planning Act

       in that it will: provide dependable, efficient, and economical energy; increase energy self-

       sufficiency; promote energy security; reduce greenhouse gas emissions; and promote

       living within the natural resources and limits of the State.

   117. Compliance with Coastal Zone Management Area (“CZMA”). Location Within CZMA.

       The Project Site contains approximately 269.195 acres and is located adjacent to and

       mauka of Kaumualiʻi Highway. The Project Site at its closest point (east/makai) is located

       approximately 700 feet from the shoreline, at an elevation of approximately 20 feet above

       mean seal level (msl). The Project Site rises in the northwesterly direction (mauka) to an

       elevation of approximately 215 feet above msl. At its mauka side, the Project Site is

       located over 2.0 mile from the closest State Forest Reserve Lands.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             31
   118. Recreational Resources. There are no public recreational opportunities taking place on

       the Project Site. The proposed Project will have no impacts on the public's access rights to

       the Shoreline or Forest Reserve areas. The construction of the Project will not overburden

       the use of, nor restrict access to, the Shoreline or the Forest Reserve areas.

   119. Cultural and Historic Resources. The only known historic, cultural or archaeological

       resources located on or near the Project Site are related to plantation era improvements. As

       a result, the proposed Project will not have any significant impacts on any pre-contact

       Historic Sites. There are no known traditional or customary practices of native Hawaiians

       (including gathering or religious practices) presently occurring on the Project Site; there

       are no pre-contact cultural or historic sites or resources located on the Project Site; and

       there are no known native Hawaiian burials on the Project Site. In addition, the Project

       will not detrimentally affect access to streams, to the shoreline, or to mountain areas.

   120. Scenic and Open Space Resources. The proposed Project will have only minor impacts

       on the scenic and open space resources on and around the Project Site. The Project will be

       compatible with and blend into the surrounding area. The Project will not interfere with

       any views to or along the shoreline. The Applicant will use additional landscaping, if

       necessary, to provide reasonable mitigation to the visual impacts the Project may have on

       the scenic quality of the Project Site and on views from Kaumualiʻi Highway and other

       surrounding areas.

   121. Coastal Ecosystems. The Project Site is not located near or along the Shoreline and is not

       part of the coastal ecosystem of this area. The proposed Project will have no impact on the

       coastal ecosystem. The Project will be constructed and maintained so that any erosion or

       increased runoff will be maintained on site, and will not be allowed to enter into the



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             32
       Shoreline, the ocean, any streams, or any drainageways leading to the ocean. No aspect of

       the Project will endanger the coastal ecosystem or have any negative impacts on it.

   122. Economic Uses. The Project will create short term economic benefits associated with the

       construction of the Project and long-term economic benefits associated with maintenance

       and operational activities on the Project Site. The proposed Project will not have any

       negative impacts on the economy.

   123. Coastal Hazards. The Project Site is not located near or along the Shoreline and will not

       be subject to any coastal hazards. The Project Site is located in Flood Zone X and will not

       be exposed to flooding. The proposed Project will have no contributory impact on

       flooding on or around the Project Site. Any additional surface water flows caused by the

       Project will be maintained on Parcels 6 and 10.

   124. Managing Development/Public Participation. Since early 2025, Applicant has been

       meeting, conducting workshops, and communicating with the greater West Kauaʻi

       community, persons with knowledge of the Project Site and surrounding areas,

       governmental representatives, and other interested organizations and parties concerning

       the Project. Applicant has elicited and made best efforts to mitigate and address the

       concerns raised by the community regarding the Project. This continued public

       participation has been further insured by the process by which this Application was heard

       by the Planning Commission and was heard by the SLUC.

   125. Beach Protection/Marine Resources. The Project Site is not located near or along the

       Shoreline. The Project will have no impact on any shoreline or beach areas, or on any

       open space areas along the Shoreline. The Project will not involve any development

       within the beach or coastal area that would have any negative impact on marine or coastal



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            33
       resources. The Kekupua Fishpond and the Makaweli Landing are located on the makai

       side of Kaumualiʻi Highway, across from the Project Site. The Project will have no impact

       on these features.

   126. Impacts Within CZMA. The Project on the Project Site will have no negative impact on

       the CZMA and will be consistent with and non-violative of the objectives and policies of

       the CZMP in the following respects:

             a. The Project will be compatible with existing uses in areas on or around the Project

                 Site.

             b. The Project will not negatively impact scenic or open space resources within the

                 CZMA.

             c. The Project will not increase runoff or otherwise endanger the coastal ecosystem.

             d. The Project on the Project Site will not be located in a coastal hazard area.

             e. The Project will have no detrimental impact on recreational, historic, or economic

                 resources.

             f. The Project will not have detrimental impacts on beach or marine resources.

             g. Approval of the Project will not result in the foreclosure of future management

                 options for development in the area.

             h. The design, siting, and landscaping of the Project as proposed will ensure that the

                 proposed Project will recognize, preserve, maintain and contribute to the

                 characteristics of the surrounding lands. In particular, the Project will be

                 compatible with, and will protect, the unique natural forms of, biologic systems

                 contained within, and aesthetic characteristic of, the CZMA.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            34
    127. Sea Level Rise. With the exception of a portion of the Aʻakuki Stream, the Project Site

         is not located in the Sea Level Rise Exposure Area (3.2 feet scenario). None of the

         Project Improvements will be subject to flooding caused by Sea Level Rise.

    General Plan Considerations

    128. Kauaʻi General Plan Land Use Designation. As shown on the Waimea Kekaha Land Use

         Map (which is contained in the Kauaʻi General Plan as Figure 5-2), the Project Site is

         located in the Agricultural Land Use Designation.

    129. Goals. The overall Goals contained in Section 1.3 of the Kauaʻi General Plan, and the

         Project's compliance therewith, are as follows:

             a. Goal 1 – A Sustainable Island. The Project will promote the operation of a clean

                 and sustainable source of additional electrical generation and storage for Kauaʻi.

             b. Goal 2 – A Unique and Beautiful Place. The Project will benefit human health

                 and the Kauaʻi environment through the use of additional electrical generation

                 and storage that does not result in greenhouse gases, water contamination, and

                 other environmental impacts associated with fossil fuel production and use.

             c. Goal 3 – A Healthy and Resilient People. The Project will have minimal visual

                 impacts and will have no negative impacts on historic sites or Hawaiian cultural

                 practices.

             d. Goal 4 – An Equitable Place, with Opportunity for All. The Project will

                 independently enhance the stability and operation of the solar electric services on

                 Kauaʻi.

   130. Policies. The Policies contained in Section 1.4 of the Kauaʻi General Plan, and the

       Project's compliance therewith, are as follows:



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            35
             a. Manage Growth to Preserve Rural Character. The Project will not detract from the

                 rural characteristics of Kauaʻi. It will support agricultural, commercial, resort, and

                 residential activities on Kauaʻi by providing additional electric generation and

                 storage resources.

             b. Provide Local Housing. The Project will have no negative impacts on local

                 housing.

             c. Recognize the Identity of Kauaʻi's Individual Towns and Districts. The Project

                 will help ensure that additional electric generation and storage resources are

                 available on Kauaʻi.

             d. Design Healthy and Complete Neighborhoods. The Project will help provide the

                 alternative solar electric services necessary for healthy and complete

                 neighborhoods.

             e. Make Strategic Infrastructure Investments. The Project will help create the

                 necessary infrastructure for growth areas identified in the Kauaʻi General Plan.

             f. Reduce the Cost of Living. The Project will produce lower cost solar electric

                 services which in turn will help reduce housing, food and transportation costs.

             g. Build a Balanced Transportation System. The Project will not increase traffic or

                 congestion problems.

             h. Protect Kauaʻi's Scenic Beauty. The Project will have minimal visual impacts.

             i. Uphold Kauaʻi as a Unique Visitor Destination. The Project will provide

                 necessary additional electric generation and storage resources to visitor

                 destination area on Kauaʻi, but will not in and of itself result in increased visitor

                 numbers.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 36
             j. Help Business Thrive. The Project will provide dependable, additional electric

                 generation and storage resources in support of business and commercial activities

                 on Kauaʻi.

             k. Help Agricultural Lands Be Productive. The Project will help provide additional

                 electric generation and storage resources for agricultural activities on Kauaʻi. The

                 Project will have no negative impact on surrounding agricultural uses, and will

                 remove only a minimal amount of land from the 136,908 acres of lands available

                 within the SLUC Agricultural District on Kauaʻi.

             l. Protect Our Watersheds. The Project will have no negative impacts on the

                 watershed areas.

             m. Complete Kauaʻi's Shift to Clean Energy. The purpose of the Project is to utilize

                 agricultural lands for the implementation of solar energy facilities for solar energy

                 generation. The Project will assist KIUC in meeting the State of Hawai‘i’s

                 mandate to achieve 100% renewable energy by 2045. In 2023, Kauaʻi achieved

                 58% renewable energy production. The Project will produce over 17% of the total

                 energy requirements for Kauaʻi, and it will allow KIUC to make significant

                 progress toward achieving 100% renewable energy. Additionally, with the

                 upcoming sunsetting of federal tax credits for renewable energy projects, this is

                 one of the last projects to qualify for those credits. These tax credits allow the

                 Project to sell energy to KIUC at a low, fixed rate, and those savings get passed

                 along to the customer. Other projects coming online after 2030 will not have that

                 same opportunity.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              37
             n. Prepare for Climate Change. Operation of the Project will not contribute to global

                 GHG emissions and climate change. The operation of the Project will have

                 substantial beneficial impacts by reducing the State and Kauaʻi’s reliance on

                 fossil fuels and their contribution to global climate change by meeting the State of

                 Hawai‘i’s mandate to achieve 100% renewable energy by 2045. The Project will

                 produce renewable energy through the proposed solar energy generating

                 infrastructures and facilities.

             o. Respect Native Hawaiian Rights and Wahi Pana. The Project will have no

                 substantial impacts on any historic sites, Hawaiian traditional and cultural

                 practices, or access to streams, shorelines, or areas associated with Hawaiian

                 religious, traditional or cultural practices.

             p. Protect Access to Kauaʻi's Treasured Places. The Project will have no impact on

                 the public's access to streams, the shoreline, trails, recreational areas, or places

                 associated with Hawaiian religious, cultural, or traditional practices.

             q. Nurture Our Keiki. The Project will help provide a stable, additional electric

                 generation and storage resources that will allow Kauaʻi's young people to grow

                 and flourish.

             r. Honor Our Kūpuna. The Project will help provide a stable, dependable additional

                 electric generation and storage resources that will help create and sustain services

                 and facilities to meet the needs of the Kūpuna of Kauaʻi.

             s. Communicate with Aloha. The scheduling of this Application before the Planning

                 Commission will allow the public to participate in the planning and decision-

                 making process for the Project.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                38
    131. Objectives & Actions by Sectors. The ten (10) Sectors contained in Section 3.0 of the

           Kauaʻi General Plan (which represent the areas that must be considered in policy

           implementation), and the Project's compliance therewith, are as follows:

             a. The Watershed. It is believed the Project will have no negative impacts on the

                  natural, historic, cultural, or environmental qualities of, or resources within, the

                  Watershed areas, or access thereto.

             b. Housing. Land easement payments will be made to a local land manager, G&R,

                  which employs many people and provides housing through the Plantation Camps.

                  These payments will give them the means to expand their business and upgrade

                  infrastructure and housing. Additionally, the project will improve grid stability

                  and reliability on the West side and increase renewable energy resources. This

                  will allow for future population growth and expansion of the housing market.

             c. Transportation. During construction, temporary traffic will be mitigated through a

                  Traffic Management Plan. Once operational, the Project will not increase traffic

                  and will have no negative impact on Kauaʻi’s transportation infrastructure.

             d. Infrastructure & Services. The Project will be an essential part of a stable and

                  dependable alternative solar electric service which promotes lower-cost services

                  in support of future growth. These benefits will accrue to all residents, including

                  those living in low income communities.

             e.   Shared Spaces. The Project will have no negative impacts on the county's efforts

                  to maintain and use Shared Spaces.

             f. Economy. The Project will be an essential part of a stable, dependable,

                  sustainable alternative solar electric service that will support the full range of



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 39
                 economic activities (including agricultural activities) on Kauaʻi. Although located

                 in the Kauaʻi General Plan Agricultural Land Use designation, the Project: is not

                 located on Important Agricultural Lands; represents a small percentage of the

                 total available Agricultural zoned lands on Kauaʻi (268.4 acres of 136,908 acres);

                 will have no impact on surrounding agricultural activities on surrounding lands;

                 and will support its own agricultural activities with a local agricultural partner.

                 Additionally, over the Project’s lifetime, including direct, indirect, and induced

                 effects, the Project is estimated to generate or sustain up to approximately 1,064

                 total jobs in Hawai‘i, $77.9 million in local labor income, and a total local

                 economic output of $216.7 million. The land easement payment will be made to a

                 local landowner, ensuring the money stays in Kauaʻi’s economy.

             g. Heritage Resources. The Project will have minimal visual impacts on surrounding

                 lands, and no substantial impacts on historic sites, Hawaiian cultural or traditional

                 practices, or access to streams, shorelines, areas associated with Hawaiian cultural

                 or traditional practices, recreational areas or other special places. The Project does

                 not contain and will not negatively impact any special features or resources that

                 are shown on the Waimea-Kekaha Heritage Resource Map (Kauaʻi General Plan

                 Figure 5-9).

             h. Energy Sustainability. The Project will: reduce fossil fuel uses; promote the

                 transition to renewable resources; encourage the use of alternative power sources;

                 promote clean, green energy production; and reduce energy costs.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                               40
             i. Public Safety & Hazards Resiliency. The Project will provide additional electric

                 generation and storage resources during natural emergencies. The Project is not

                 located near the shoreline and will not be subject to sea level rise.

             j. Opportunity & Health for All. The Project will be part of a stable and dependable

                 additional electric generation and storage resources, which is an essential

                 component of maintaining and growing educational and healthcare services which

                 benefit all residents.

   132. Compliance with Kauaʻi General Plan Standards. The Project itself will have no

       significant impact on the surrounding environment. The Project will include uses that are

       compatible with agricultural and other uses in the area, as well as with the surrounding

       environment. The Project will help provide a stable, independent source of additional

       electric generation and storage resources, which will assist agricultural activities on

       Kauaʻi.



   Development Plan Considerations

    133. Community Plan Area. The Project Site is located in the West Kauaʻi geographic area

         and is subject to the provisions of the West Kauaʻi Community Plan ("WKCP") as set

         forth in Title IV, Chapter 10, Article 3 of the Kauaʻi County Code, 1987 ("KCC").

    134. Land Use. The desired long-range land use pattern for the Project Site is shown on the

         West Kauaʻi Regional Map (Figure 12 of the WKCP) and on the Makaweli Town Plan

         Map (Figure 15 of the WKCP). In both cases, the maps provide for an Agriculture Land

         Use designation for the Project Site.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           41
    135. Regional Policies. The Regional Policies set forth in the WKCP, and the Project's

         compliance with such policies, are as follows:

             a. Town Design.

                      i. Town Design Policy #1. Focus development in existing towns to protect

                          West Kauaʻi's rural qualities and agricultural resources.

                          Response. The Project could not be placed next to an existing town,

                          because it is utility-scale and requires 200+ acres of land. However, the

                          compatible agriculture plan will increase the amount of agriculture

                          occurring on this land, expanding the agricultural resources in West

                          Kauaʻi.



                     ii. Town Design Policy #2. Strengthen and activate town centers through

                          development that supports the unique character of each town.

                          Response. The Project is not applicable to this design policy.



                     iii. Town Design Policy #3. Meet the housing needs of West Kauaʻi's

                          residents by expanding mixed-use communities that are walkable,

                          bikeable, and resilient.

                          Response. Land easement payments will be made to a local land manager,

                          G&R, which employs many people and provides housing through the

                          Plantation Camps. These payments will give them the means to expand

                          their business and upgrade infrastructure in the Plantation Camps.

                          Additionally, the Project will improve grid stability and reliability on the



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 42
                          West side and increase renewable energy resources. This will allow for

                          future population growth and expansion of the housing market.



                     iv. Town Design Policy #4. Protect and support the unique Plantation Camps.

                          Response. Land easement payments will be made to a local land manager,

                          G&R, which employs many people and provides housing through the

                          Plantation Camps. These payments will give them the means to expand

                          their business and upgrade infrastructure in the Plantation Camps.

                          Additionally, during the early project design, land within the Kaʻawanui

                          Village Plantation Camp Urban Zoning expansion area was considered for

                          the Project. Applicant removed the Plantation Camp zoning expansion

                          area from the Project footprint to protect and support the future growth of

                          Kaʻawanui Village.



             b. Land Transportation.

                      i. Land Transportation Policy #1. Work with the Hawaii Department of

                          Transportation (HDOT) to identify congestion relief measures along

                          Kaumualiʻi Highway.

                          Response. During construction, the Project will implement a Traffic

                          Management Plan to mitigate traffic impacts along Kaumualiʻi Highway.

                          During operation, the Project will not have any negative impact on this

                          Policy.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             43
                     ii. Land Transportation Policy #2. Improve bus service by implementing the

                          West Kauaʻi components of the Kauaʻi Short-Range Transit Plan.

                          Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.



                     iii. Land Transportation Policy #3. In each community, establish "safe

                          routes"—primarily street networks that safely accommodate pedestrians

                          and bicyclists to get from homes to schools, parks, shops, jobs, and

                          services.

                          Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.



                     iv. Land Transportation Policy #4. Establish shared-use paths for bicyclists

                          and pedestrians that connect Westside towns.

                          Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.



             c. Heritage Resources.

                      i. Heritage Resources Policy #1. Preserve and protect the integrity of sacred

                          heritage resources for current and future generations.

                          Response. The Project has conducted an AIS and will follow the SHPD

                          directive to preserve historic properties located within the Project Site as

                          required. Additionally, Applicant has consulted with the landowner, who

                          has owned the land since 1865 and has an intimate knowledge of its

                          history and heritage resources. With their input, the Project is preserving




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 44
                          historic properties significant to the family, such as the rock wall located

                          on both sides of Kaʻawanui Road.



                     ii. Heritage Resources Policy #2. Celebrate the cultural and historic features

                          that represent West Kauaʻi's diverse cultural influences.

                           Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.



                     iii. Heritage Resources Policy #3. Uphold traditional and customary rights.

                          Response. The Project has conducted a Cultural Impact Assessment with

                          Ka Paʻakai Analysis, which confirms that the Project will not negatively

                          impact traditional and customary Native Hawaiian rights. Additionally, the

                          Project has conducted extensive community outreach, providing the public

                          with multiple avenues to ask questions and share their feedback and

                          knowledge of the area. The Project will continue to collect feedback

                          throughout its life.



                     iv. Heritage Resources Policy #4. Preserve West Kauaʻi's historic structures

                          and perpetuate its unique architecture.

                          Response. The Project will follow the SHPD directive to preserve historic

                          properties located within the Project Site as required. Additionally,

                          Applicant has consulted with the landowner, who has owned the land

                          since 1865 and has an intimate knowledge of its history and heritage

                          resources. With their input, the Project is preserving historic properties



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 45
                          significant to the family, such as the rock wall located on both sides of

                          Kaʻawanui Road.



             d. Resiliency.

                      i. Resiliency Policy #1. Adapt West Kauaʻi's low-lying neighborhoods for

                          climate change impacts and lay the groundwork for managed retreat.

                          Response. The Project, by generating energy from clean, renewable solar

                          energy, will prevent the burning of oil and reduce Kauaʻi's greenhouse gas

                          emissions. This will ultimately help reduce the severity of climate change.



                     ii. Resiliency Policy #2. Increase the resiliency of flood prone neighborhoods

                          through flood mitigation, drainage improvements, green infrastructure,

                          and updated building standards.

                          Response. The Project, by generating energy from clean, renewable solar

                          energy, will prevent the burning of oil and reduce Kauaʻi's greenhouse gas

                          emissions. This will ultimately help reduce the severity of climate change.



                     iii. Resiliency Policy #3. Strengthen the resiliency of the region's critical

                          infrastructure and public facilities.

                          Response. The Project will strengthen the electrical grid's resilience by

                          increasing renewable energy production and modernizing critical grid

                          infrastructure through the construction of the new Kaʻawanui Substation.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              46
                          The battery energy storage system component of the Project also creates

                          firm, dispatchable energy that can be deployed when needed.



                     iv. Resiliency Policy #4. Build on West Kauaʻi's close-knit community

                          networks to promote regional resiliency and grassroots disaster planning

                          and preparedness.

                          Response. This Project will build Kauaʻi energy sovereignty, decreasing

                          its reliance on foreign oil and insulating it from global disasters and supply

                          disruptions. The Project will strengthen the electrical grid's resilience by

                          increasing renewable energy production and modernizing critical grid

                          infrastructure through the construction of the new Kaʻawanui Substation.

                          The battery energy storage system component of the Project also creates

                          firm, dispatchable energy that can be deployed when needed.



                      v. Resiliency Policy #5. Ensure the long-term resiliency of the land

                          transportation network.

                          Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.

                          There will be no alteration to the existing transportation network.



                     vi. Resiliency Policy #6. Improve West Kauaʻi's long-term food security and

                          sustain vital self-reliant community food systems.

                          Response. The Project will contribute to West Kauaʻi's long-term food

                          security through its compatible agriculture plan with a local agriculture



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 47
                          partner. The agricultural partner's goal is to produce food for commercial

                          sale.

             e. Shared Spaces.

                      i. Shared Spaces Policy #1. Support community-led design, programming,

                          and stewardship of shared spaces.

                           Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.



                     ii. Shared Spaces Policy #2. Protect the community's natural and recreational

                          resources in perpetuity.

                          Response. The Project will not have any negative impacts on this Policy.



             f. Economic Development.

                      i. Economic Development Policy #1. Uphold Agriculture as an anchor

                          industry.

                          Response. Through the compatible agriculture component of this Project,

                          more agriculture will occur because of the Project than what is currently

                          occurring on the land. Recently, the land has mainly been used for

                          rotational grazing. Under the compatible agriculture plan, the agricultural

                          partner will work to produce food for commercial sale.



                     ii. Economic Development Policy #2. Provide supportive environments for

                          business success.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              48
                          Response. The Project will increase grid stability and resilience, creating a

                          dependable energy supply for businesses. It will also provide energy at a

                          low, fixed cost, cheaper than the current cost of fossil fuels, contributing

                          to a lower cost of energy for businesses.



                     iii. Economic Development Policy #3. Grow science literacy and invest in a

                          STREAM-ready workforce.

                          Response. Over the Project’s lifetime, including direct, indirect, and

                          induced effects, the Project is estimated to generate or sustain up to

                          approximately 1,064 total jobs in Hawai'i, including local construction and

                          Operations and Maintenance jobs on Kauaʻi. Additionally, Petitioner has

                          been an active educational partner since 2019, supporting and participating

                          in Kauaʻi STREAM events and programs, including but not limited to: the

                          Kauaʻi Community Science Center, educational tours of Lāwaʻi Solar +

                          Storage, Career Fairs, Teacher Trainings, and Earth Day presentations.

                          Petitioner has also funded college scholarships for Kauaʻi STEM majors

                          through the Hawaiʻi Community Foundation.



Compliance with Requirements for State Land Use Special Permit

    136. Special Permit Requirements. The proposed Project will meet with the requirements for

           an SLUC Special Permit, as contained in Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes Section 205- 6 and

           in Section 15-15-95 of the Land Use Commission Rules (Hawaiʻi Administrative

           Rules) as set forth herein.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                 49
    137. The use will not be contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished by the HRS

           Chapter 205 and 205A, and the SLUC Rules. The proposed use will not interfere with

           other agricultural uses which are generally allowed within the SLUC Agricultural

           District. It is consistent with solar facility uses which are allowed (with a Special

           Permit) in the SLUC Agricultural District. It is also located so as to minimize impacts

           on agricultural activities in this area.

    138. The desired use will not adversely affect surrounding property. As discussed herein, the

           proposed use will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and uses, and will

           not generate any significant adverse impacts. It will not prevent surrounding lands from

           being used for agricultural purposes. The amount of additional traffic that will be

           generated as a result of this proposal will be insignificant and will not create any

           substantial adverse impacts.

    139. The use will not unreasonably burden public agencies to provide roads and streets,

           sewers, water, drainage and school improvements, and police and fire protection. As

           discussed herein, no burden will be placed on public agencies to provide additional

           facilities, services, and utilities as a result of this proposal. Conversely, by providing an

           alternative green source of energy for electricity, it will promote the sustainability and

           availability of electrical production resources for the public.

    140. Unusual conditions, trends and needs have arisen since the district boundaries and

           regulations were established. The State has recently recognized the need to promote

           alternative energy production, including solar energy production. Such facilities require

           large areas, as are available in the SLUC Agricultural District compared to the SLUC

           Urban District. Provided such new uses to not adversely impact surrounding



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              50
           agricultural activities, they are recognized as necessary and permissible in the SLUC

           Agricultural District.

    141. The land on which the proposed use is sought is unsuited for the uses permitted with

           the District. To the extent feasible, the Applicant will continue to use the Project Site

           for Agricultural Activities as described in the Agricultural Plan. In addition, although

           the Project Site is suitable for agricultural uses, it is better suited at this time for the

           production of alternative energy production via the Project proposed herein.



HRS Shapter 343 (Environmental Impact Statements) Considerations

    142. HRS Chapter 343. The Project is not subject to the provisions of Hawaiʻi Revised

           Statutes Chapter 343. HRS Chapter 343 requires the preparation of an Environmental

           Assessment and/or an Environmental Impact Statement for certain activities as

           specified in HRS Section 343-5. The proposed Project does not fall within such

           specified activities, in that the Project does not:

             a. Propose the use of state or county lands or the use of state or county funds;

             b. Propose any use within any land classified as conservation district by the State

                 Land Use Commission under HRS Chapter 205;

             c. Propose any use within the shoreline area as defined in HRS Section 205A-41;

             d. Propose any use within any historic site as designated in the National Register or

                 Hawaiʻi Register as provided for in the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, Public

                 Law 89-665, or HRS Chapter 6E;




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                  51
             e. Propose any use within the Waikīkī area of Oʻahu, the boundaries of which are

                 delineated in the land use ordinance as amended, establishing the "Waikīkī

                 Special District";

             f. Propose any amendments to existing county general plans where such amendment

                 would result in designations other than agriculture, conservation, or preservation;

             g. Propose any reclassification of any land classified as conservation district by the

                 State land Use Commission under HRS Chapter 205;

             h. Propose the construction of new, or the expansion or modification of existing,

                 helicopter facilities within the state; or

             i. Propose the construction of a wastewater treatment unit, waste-to energy facility,

                 oil refinery, or power generating facility (which use petroleum based fuels).



Native Hawaiian Issues

    143. Traditional or Cultural Practices. An analysis of the traditional or cultural practices

           occurring on or related to the Project Site have been addressed in the Archaeological

           Reports, in the Community Outreach Report, in the Cultural Impact Assessment and Ka

           Paʻakai Analysis for Kaʻawanui Project (Cultural Surveys Hawaii, Inc.), and in the

           Cultural Study (collectively, the "Ka Paʻakai Report"). The conclusion contained in the

           Ka Paʻakai Report is that the Project will have no impact on any known traditional or

           customary practices of native Hawaiians within the Project Site. As noted in the Ka

           Paʻakai Report, no traditional cultural properties were identified as existing, and no

           traditional cultural practices were identified as taking place, within the Project Site or

           its vicinity.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                                52
    144. Summary of Impacts on Traditional or Cultural Practices. In summary, the Project will

           have no impact on any known traditional or customary practices of native Hawaiians

           for the following reasons:

             a. There are no known traditional or customary practices of native Hawaiians that

                 are presently occurring within the Project Site.

             b. There are no special gathering practices taking place within any portion of the

                 Project Site.

             c. The Project will not detrimentally affect: access to any streams; access to the

                 shoreline or other adjacent shoreline areas; or gathering along any streams, the

                 shoreline or in the ocean.

             d. There are no known religious practices taking place within the Project Site.

             e. There are no known pre-contact cultural or historic sites or resources located

                 within the Project Site.

             f. There are no known burials within the Project Site.



OFFICE OF PLANNING AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT POSITION

   145. The OPSD filed their Comments on Kaʻawanui Solar Application for a Special Permit

       with the LUC on May 13, 2026, and recommended approval of the State Special Permit.

   146. During the LUC’s May 13, 2026, hearing, OPSD presented that the proposed project is

       an unusual and reasonable use permitted in the State agricultural district, based on HAR

       Section 15-15-95c [Tr. 5/13/2026, pgs.51-53].




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            53
KAUAʻI COUNTY PLANNING DEPARTMENT POSITION

    147. Kauaʻi County transferred the record to the LUC on May 4, 2026. Exhibit 26, of the

         record is the Kauaʻi County Planning Department Directors Report, and Exhibit 41, is

         the County’s Executed Decision and Order, which recommends the approval of the State

         Special Permit, subject to the 24 conditions contained in the Decision and Order.

   148. During the LUC May 13, 2026, hearing, Kauaʻi County Planning Department verbally

       presented their position, representing that the Planning Commission conducted a thorough

       review, including public hearings, consideration of testimony, both from the applicant and

       public, as well as agency comments, evaluation of applicable standards governing special

       permits within the agricultural district, and recommended that the Commission approve

       the State Special Use Permit [Tr. 5/13/2026, pgs.50-51].

   149. During the line of questioning, Kauaʻi County agreed to the Commissions amendments to

       the conditions 2, 8, and 11 [Tr. 5/13/2026, pgs.66].

                                           CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

    1. To the extent that any of the following Conclusions of Law shall be determined to be

        Findings of Fact, they shall be deemed as such.

    2. The LUC has jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to HRS §205-6, and HAR §§15-15-95

        and 15-15-96.

    3. HRS Sections 205-2 and 205-4.5(a), which provide permitted uses in the State Land Use

        Agricultural District

    4. Based upon the record and pursuant to HRS §205-6, HRS and HAR §15-15-95 et seq.,

        the LUC finds that the Project meets the guidelines for determining an "unusual and




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                        54
        reasonable use" and "would promote the effectiveness and objectives" of HRS Chapter

        205 within the State Land Use Agricultural District.

    5. The Project constitutes an unusual and reasonable use within the agricultural district other

        than those for which the district is classified, and complies with §205-6(a), HRS.

    6. The Project constitutes an exceptional situation where the use desired would not change

        the essential character of the district nor be inconsistent therewith. Save Sunset Beach

        Coalition v. City and County of Honolulu, 102 Haw. 465, 78 P.3d 1 (2003).

    7. The Project constitutes a use that would promote the effectiveness and objectives of HRS

        Chapter 205, and complies with §205-6(c), HRS.

    8. The Project is consistent with the "overarching purpose" of HRS Chapter 205 which is to

        "protect and conserve natural resources and foster intelligent, effective, and orderly land

        allocation and development." Kauaʻi Springs v. Planning Commission, 130 Haw. 407,

        312 P.3d 283 (2013).

    9. The Project’s Agricultural Plan dedicates the land to long-term agricultural uses, supports

        the sustained growth of agriculture uses, supports the sustained growth of the agricultural

        industry.

    10. Article XI, section 1, of the Hawaiʻi State Constitution requires the State to conserve and

        protect Hawaiʻi’s natural beauty and all natural resources, including land, water, air,

        minerals, and energy sources, and to promote the development and utilization of these

        resources in a manner consistent with their conservation and in furtherance of the self

        sufficiency of the State.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                           55
    11. Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawaiʻi State Constitution requires the State to conserve and

        protect agricultural lands, promote diversified agriculture, increase agricultural self-

        sufficiency, and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands.

    12. Article XII, Section 7, of the Hawaiʻi State Constitution requires the State to protect

        Native Hawaiian traditional and customary rights. The State reaffirms and shall protect

        all rights, customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, cultural, and religious

        purposes and possessed by ahupuaʻa tenants who are descendants of Native Hawaiians

        who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to the right of the State to

        regulate such rights.

    13. The LUC finds the Project has satisfied the requirements of Section 205-4.5(a)(21), HRS.

    14. The Project is consistent with the Legislature’s statement of energy policy, as set forth in

        HRS§196-1, HRS §226-18, and the State of Hawaiʻi’s stated policy to mitigate its

        greenhouse gas emissions by sequestering more atmospheric carbon and greenhouse

        gases than the State produces as quickly as practicable, but no later than 2045 pursuant to

        HRS Chapter 225P, HRS§225P-1.

    15. The LUC, through its judgment and experience, voted to approve the Ka‘awanui Solar

        Special Permit Application for solar development on approximately 269.195 acre portion

        of land located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by Kauaʻi Tax Map

        Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) (“Parcel 10”), subject to the

        24 County Conditions with the three additional Condition amendments on County

        conditions 2, 8, and 11.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                               56
                                           DECISION AND ORDER

        The LUC, having duly considered the written and oral arguments presented by the

Petitioner, AES Hawaiʻi, Kaʻawanui Solar, LLC., the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department

and Planning Commission, the OPSD, and members of the public, and a motion having been

made and seconded at the meeting on May 13, 2026, held at the Hilton Garden Inn Kauaʻi

Wailua Bay, Kūhiō Ballroom 3-5920 Kūhiō Highway, Kapaʻa, HI 96746, and the motion having

received the affirmative votes required by HAR § 15-15-13, and there being good cause for the

motion,

        HEREBY FINDS AND CONCLUDES that, pursuant to HRS Chapter 205 and the

Commission Rules under HAR chapter 15-15, upon consideration of the decision-making criteria

set forth in HAR § 15-15-95(c), and based upon the preponderance of the evidence and good

cause shown, the Petitioner’s application for a Special Permit to develop and operate a utility-

scale solar energy facility is approved, on approximately 269.195 acre portion of land located in

Makaweli, Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006

(por.) and 010 (por.), subject to the 24 County Conditions with the three additional Condition

amendments on County conditions 2, 8, and 11, attached hereto and incorporated by reference

herein, subject to the following conditions:

        1. The project shall be constructed as represented. Any changes to the operation and/or

             the respective structures shall be reviewed by the Planning Director to determine

             whether Planning Commission review and approval is warranted.

        2. Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall be made

             available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50 percent

             below the fair market rent for comparable properties, as long as the Project is in



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             57
             operation. Compatible agricultural operations shall be established by the Applicant

             and its successors and/or assigns within 6 months of the start of commercial power

             generation. Extensions to this deadline may be granted by the Director of the County

             of Kauaʻi Planning Department, after consultation with the State Department of

             Agriculture and Biosecurity for unforeseen extenuating circumstances. Additional

             consideration may be given if the Applicant is actively seeking to have such

             operations established.

        3. If at any time during the term of the subject permits no compatible agricultural

             operations exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for 6 months, the Applicant

             shall notify the Director of the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department in writing

             within 30 days of the end of the 6-month period. If requested by the Planning

             Director, the Applicant shall attend a meeting of the Planning Commission and

             submit a report to the Planning Commission detailing the Applicant’s actual and

             reasonable efforts to establish compatible agricultural operations on the usable lands

             of the Petition Area. The Planning Commission may determine whether probable

             cause exists to re-evaluate the subject permits and to hold a hearing pursuant to the

             Rules of the Planning Commission. Extensions to the 6-month deadline may be

             granted by the Planning Director for unforeseen extenuating circumstances.

        4. The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the following from

             the Director of the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department, prior to the issuance of a

             grading or building permit:

                 a. A survey map accompanied by metes and bounds description of the approved

                      Petition Area.



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             58
                 b. A site plan showing the area required under Condition 2, above, relating to the

                      minimum land area to be made available for compatible agricultural use.

        5.   Prior to the closing of the building permit for the facility, the Applicant shall submit

             to the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department proof of financial security, such as a

             letter of credit or similar assurance, from a creditworthy financial institution

             satisfactory to the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department. The security shall remain

             in place for the duration of the operation of the Project, with evidence of same

             provided to the Director of the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department on an annual

             basis, in an amount approved by the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department as

             sufficient to decommission the Project and restore the Petition Area to substantially

             the same physical condition as existed prior to the development of the facility.

                 The Applicant shall decommission the facility (not including the Kaʻawanui

             Substation), including the removal of all equipment related to the facility, within

             twelve (12) months following the termination of operations of the facility. A change

             in the project ownership or a change in ownership of the land subject to the Special

             Permit, which warrants a new proof of financial security to decommission the project,

             shall be submitted to the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department for processing

             through the Planning Commission, within three (3) months of the ownership change.

                 The Applicant shall incorporate this condition in the license and/or lease

             agreement with the landowner and said license and/or lease agreement shall be

             reviewed for approval by the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department.

        6. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to flora on site as follows:




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             59
                 a. Prior to initiating any ground-disturbing activities, the Applicant should

                      identify and implement feasible measures to reasonably protect, replace or

                      relocate any indigenous or native plant species, or cultural and natural

                      resources within the project area, based on consultation with applicable

                      governmental agencies.

        7. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:

                 a. Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training module,

                      which shall include all potential endangered species that may frequent the

                      Petition Area.

                 b. All construction workers and solar facility employees shall undergo

                      endangered species awareness training prior to starting work.

                 c. In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed Threatened

                      Species, Newell’s Shearwater and other seabirds, external lighting shall be

                      only of the following types: shielded lights, cut-off luminaries, or indirect

                      lighting. Spotlights aimed upward or spotlighting of structures, landscaping or

                      the ocean shall be prohibited.

                 d. Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.

                 e. Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring within the Project Site, and

                      report occurrences to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ("USFWS").

                 f. Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing or grading activities from June 1

                      through September 15.

        8. The Applicant shall begin commercial operations of the Project within four (4) years

             of the date of the Land Use Commission's (LUC) Decision and Order approving the



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              60
             Special Permit. Requests for extension of this deadline shall be submitted to the

             Director of the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department prior to the expiration of the

             deadline. The LUC may grant an extension to the deadline to establish the Project due

             to unforeseen circumstances that were beyond the control of the Applicant. This

             Special Permit shall be valid for a period of thirty-five (35) years from the date of the

             start of commercial operations of the Project, subject to further extensions upon a

             timely request for extension filed with the Planning Commission at least one hundred

             twenty (120) days prior to the Special Permit's expiration. Approval of Special Permit

             time extensions shall be required from the State of Hawaiʻi Land Use Commission.

        9. On or before December 31 of each year that the Special Permit is in effect, the

             Applicant or its successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, State of Hawaiʻi

             Office of Planning and Sustainable Development, and the County of Kauaʻi Planning

             Department that demonstrates the Applicant’s compliance with conditions of the

             subject permits.

        10. Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to significant

             increases in the number of PV panels; (2) amendments to the conditions of approval;

             (3) significant expansions of the approved area; or (4) change in uses stated herein,

             shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and the

             SLUC. Minor modifications including minor additions to accessory uses and

             structures, and new incidental uses and structures in the approved area are subject to

             review and approval by the Director of the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department.

        11. The Applicant shall notify the Director of the County of Kauaʻi Planning Department

             and the State of Hawaiʻi Land Use Commission of:



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                             61
                 a. Any change or transfer of the license on the Petition Area.

                 b. Any change in uses on the Petition Area.

                 c. Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or

                 d. Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.

        12. Enforcement of the conditions of the subject permits shall be enforced pursuant to the

             Rules of the Planning Commission, including the issuance of an order to show cause

             as to the reason the subject permits should not be revoked if the Planning

             Commission has reason to believe that there has been a failure to perform the

             conditions herein.

        13. If the PV array or the Project creates a hazardous condition for pilots or motorists, the

             facility operator shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon notification by the State

             of Hawaiʻi Department of Transportation (DOT), DOT Airports Division, or the

             Federal Aviation Administration.

        14. If required to mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping shall be installed and

             maintained around the Solar Project to screen it when viewed from Kaumualiʻi

             Highway. The County of Kauaʻi Planning Department shall determine whether

             additional landscape screening is necessary and the degree at which it is provided.

        15. In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains, structural

             remains, cultural deposits, artifacts, sand deposits, or sink holes, are identified during

             grading and/or construction activities, all work shall cease in the immediate vicinity

             of the find, the find shall be protected from additional disturbance, and the State

             Historic Preservation Division (SHPD) and Kauaʻi Island Burial Council, as

             applicable, shall be contacted immediately. Without any limitation to any other



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              62
             condition found herein, if any burials or archaeological or historic sites are discovered

             during the course of construction of the facility, all construction activity in the

             vicinity of the discovery shall stop until the issuance of an archaeological clearance

             from the SHPD has been obtained that mitigation measures have been implemented to

             its satisfaction.

        16. Project construction workers and all other personnel involved in the construction and

             related activities of the Project shall be informed of the possibility of inadvertent

             cultural finds, including human skeletal remains. In the event any potential historic

             properties are identified during construction activities, all activities will cease and the

             SHPD will be notified pursuant to HAR §13-280-3. In the event ʻiwi kupuna (Native

             Hawaiian skeletal remains) are identified, all earth moving activities in the area will

             stop, the area will be cordoned off, and the SHPD and Police Department will be

             notified pursuant to HAR §13-300-40. In addition, in the event of an inadvertent

             discovery of human remains, the completion of a burial treatment plan, in compliance

             with HAR §13-300 and HRS §6E-43, is required.

        17. In the event ʻiwi kupuna and/or cultural finds are encountered during construction,

             Project proponents shall consult with cultural and lineal descendants of the area to

             develop a reinterment plan and cultural preservation plan for proper cultural protocol,

             curation, and long-term maintenance.

        18. The Applicant shall resolve and comply with all agency requirements as

             recommended in the permit application review, including but not limited to the permit

             requirements for the County DPW-Engineering Division, water requirements for the

             County Department of Water, requirements and recommendations of SHPD or the



SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                               63
             Kauaʻi Island Burial Council, and regulations involving environmental concerns as

             administered by the State Department of Health.

        19. The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices (BMP’s) to

             ensure the Project does not generate impacts that may affect the health, safety, and

             welfare of those in the surrounding area of the proposal.

        20. The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building techniques

             and operational methods for the Project, such as Leadership in Energy and

             Environmental Design (L.E.E.D.) standards or another comparable state-approved,

             nationally recognized, and consensus-based guideline, standard, or system, and

             strategies, which may include but is not limited to recycling, natural lighting,

             extensive landscaping, solar panels, low energy fixtures, low energy lighting and

             other similar methods and techniques. All such proposals shall be reflected on the

             plans submitted for building permit review.

        21. To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and applicable

             prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the Applicant shall seek to hire

             Kauaʻi contractors as long as they are qualified and reasonably competitive with other

             contractors, and shall seek to employ residents of Kauaʻi in temporary construction

             and permanent jobs. It is recognized that the Applicant may have to employ non-

             Kauaʻi residents for particular skilled jobs where no qualified Kauaʻi resident

             possesses such skills. For the purposes of this condition, the Commission shall relieve

             the Applicant of this requirement if the Applicant is subjected to anti-competitive

             restraints on trade or other monopolistic practices.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                            64
        22. The Applicant is advised that prior to construction and/or use, additional government

             agency conditions may be imposed. It shall be the Applicant’s responsibility to

             resolve those conditions with the respective agency(ies).

        23. The Planning Commission reserves the right to revise, modify, add or delete

             conditions of approval in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts this project

             may create, or revoke the permits through the proper procedures should conditions of

             approval be violated or adverse impacts be created that cannot be properly addressed.

        24. The portion of the Project containing the Kaʻawanui Substation shall be subject to

             Conditions 1, 4a., 6, 7, 12, and 14 through 23, but shall not be subject to Conditions

             2, 3, 4b., 5, 8 through 11, and 13.




SP26-416 Kaʻawanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                              65
                               ADOPTION OF DECISION AND ORDER

        The undersigned Commissioners, being familiar with the record and proceedings, hereby

adopt and approve the foregoing DECISION AND ORDER on 06/17/2026
                                                     ______________. This

DECISION AND ORDER may be executed in counterparts. This DECISION AND ORDER

shall take effect upon the date this DECISION AND ORDER is certified by this Commission.

                                               06/17/2026                  May 13, 2026.



 APPROVED AS TO FORM                       LAND USE COMMISSION

 _______________________
 MIRANDA STEED
 Deputy Attorney General

                                           By__________________________________
                                             BRIAN LEE
                                             Chairperson and Commissioner



 Filed and effective on:

  06/17/2026
 ___________________

 Certified by:

 _______________________________
 DANIEL E. ORODENKER
 Executive Officer




SP26-416 Ka awanui Solar
Application for State Special Use Permit                                                   66
                           BEFORE THE LAND USE COMMISSION

                                    OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI

 In the Matter of the Petition of                 )   DOCKET NO. SP26-416
                                                  )
 KAʻAWANUI SOLAR                                  )   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
                                                  )
 For Special Use Permit to Establish a Solar      )
 Energy Facility on Approximately 269.195         )
 acre portion of land situated in Makaweli,       )
 Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by           )
 Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006          )
 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) ("Parcel      )
 10").                                            )
 _____________________________________            )

                                    CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

       I hereby certify that a copy of the FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS OF LAW,

AND DECISION AND ORDER approve the Ka‘awanui Solar Special Permit Application for

solar development on approximately 269.195 acre portion of land located in Makaweli, Waimea,

Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and

010 (por.) (“Parcel 10”), subject to the 24 County Conditions and the three additional Condition

amendments to Conditions 2, 8, and 11, adopt the condition language in the Counties Decision

and Order, and authorize the Chairperson to execute the order necessary to effectuate the

Commission’s decision and order, subject to review and approval by the Department of the
Attorney General, was served upon the following, by either hand delivery or depositing the same

in the U.S. Postal Service by regular or certified mail on the date appearing below, as follows:


HAND           LEO ASUNCION, Land Use Division Administrator
DEL.:          MARY ALICE EVANS, Director
               Office of Planning and Sustainable Development
               P. O. Box 2359
               Honolulu, Hawa 96804-2359

HAND           ALISON KATO, Esq.
DEL.:          Deputy Attorney General
               425 Queen Street
               Honolulu, Hawa 96813

CERT.          LAURA BARZILAI, ESQ.
MAIL:          Office of the County Attorney
               4444 Rice Street, Suite 220



CERT.
MAIL:          Department of Planning
               4444 Rice Street, Suite A473



CERT.          CURTIS TABATA, ESQ.
DEL.:          888 Mililani Street, Suite 308
               Honolulu, HI 96813-2931


       06/17/2026
Dated _________________________




DANIEL E. ORODENKER
Executive Officer
