                                             Pre-decisional Document
                                             Pre-decisional Document




                DOCKET NO. SP26-416
                 AES Ka‘
                 AES Ka'awanui Solar

                   Special Permit Application


   For approximately 269.195
                     269.195 acre portion
                                     portion of land located
                                                     located in Makaweli,
  Waimea, Kaua'i, Hawaii,
                  Hawai'i, identified by Kaua'i Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-
                                                                      1-7-
         006:006 (por.) ("Parcel 6")” and 010 (por.) (“"Parcel
                                                        Parcel 10”").
                                                                   ).




                             STAFF REPORT


Hearing
May 13, 2026




 Daniel Orodenker,
        Orodenker, Executive Officer



 Approved for Submittal: May 5, 2026



SP26-416 AES Ka'awanui Solar
Staff Report -Special Permit
                      Permit Application
                                                                 Page 1 of 20
                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
        Section No.                                     Page No.




        1.     Explanation of the Proceeding
                      Legal precedent and obligations       3-5


        2.     Background Information
               and Procedural Matters                       5-6


        3.     Summary of Petitioner’s Position             7 - 10



        4.     Summary of County Position                   10 - 16


        5.     Office of Planning and
               Sustainable Development                      16


        6.     Staff Analysis and
               Questions for Resolution                     16 - 20




SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                              Page 2 of 20
 1.     EXPLANATION OF THE PROCEEDING
        The proceeding before the Land Use Commission (“Commission” or “LUC”) is
        an Application for a State Special Use Permit ("SUP") Application SP26-416
        (County: SP-2026-4, Use Permit U-2026-9, and Class IV Zoning Permit Z-IV-
        2026-12) (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Application") filed by
        Ka‘awanui Solar, LLC ("Applicant"), to construct a solar energy facility and
        accessory uses and structures (referred to herein as the "Project", the "Solar
        Project", or the "facility") on approximately 269.195 acres of land in the State
        Land Use Agricultural District identified by Kaua‘i Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-
        006 (por.) and (4) 1-7-006:010 (por.) in Makaweli, Kaua‘i, Hawai‘i.

        Special Permit application proceedings are made initially at the appropriate
        county planning commission, in this case the County of Kaua‘i Planning
        Commission. For an application that involves an area greater than 15 acres
        the record is developed at the county level and a decision with
        recommendations is transmitted to the Land Use Commission for appropriate
        modifications and final decision making.

        The Commission must decide on the request within 45 days after receipt of
        the complete record 1 of the proceedings held by the County. Five affirmative
        votes are required to approve, deny, or modify such a request

        AUTHORITY AND LEGAL PRECEDENT
        Hawaiʻi Administrative Rules (“HAR”) § 15-15-70(a) provides that “[a]ny
        party may make motions before, during, or after the close of a hearing.”

        HAR §15-15-95(b) “Special permits for areas greater than fifteen acres
        require approval of both the county planning commission and the
        commission…”

        HAR §15-15-95(f) “The county planning commission may impose such
        protective conditions as it deems necessary in the issuance of a special
        permit…,and if appropriate, a time limit for the duration of the special permit,
        provided, however, that the commission for good cause shown, may specify
        or change the time period of the special permit…The county planning
        commission, with the concurrence of the commission, may extend the time
        limit if it deems that circumstances warrant the granting of the extension.”


1 Transmitted on May 4, 2026, 45-day deadline is June 18, 2026



SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                Page 3 of 20
         HAR §15-15-96(a) “Within forty-five days after the receipt of the county
         planning commission’s decision and the complete record of the proceeding
         before the county planning commission…, the commission shall act to
         approve, approve with modifications, or deny the petition. The commission
         may impose additional restrictions as may be necessary or appropriate in
         granting the approval, including adherence to representations made by the
         petitioner. Upon determination by the commission, the petition may be
         remanded to the county planning commission for further proceedings.”

         Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §91-10(5), the party initiating the
         proceeding shall have the burden of proof 2, including the burden of producing
         evidence as well as the burden of persuasion. The degree or quantum of
         proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence 3. Petitioner has the burden to
         show good cause for the request and a preponderance of evidence.

         If good cause is shown, the Commission may modify or delete any of the
         conditions imposed or modify the Commission’s order (HAR §15-15-
         94(b)). “Good cause” can mean “a substantial reason amounting in law to a
         legal excuse,” and that it will also depend on the specific circumstances of an
         individual case. Determining “good cause” is at the discretion of the
         Commission.

         Guidelines for Special Permits
         The guidelines for Special Permits are contained within HAR 15-15-95, that
         allows certain “unusual and reasonable” uses within the Agricultural and Rural
         Districts. These guidelines are to be used in determining whether a proposed
         use is “unusual and reasonable.”
             1. The use shall not be contrary to the objectives sought to be
                 accomplished by Chapters 205 and 205A, HRS, and the rules of the
                 Commission.
             2. The desired use would not adversely affect surrounding property.
             3. The use would not unreasonable burden public agencies to provide

2 A party’s obligation to prove its claims or defenses. It has two parts:
                                                                      the duty to produce evidence, and
the duty to persuade the judge or jury that the evidence meets the required standard of proof. (Blacks
Law Dictionary (abridged 4th Edition, 1984 and 12th Edition, 2024)

3 The word “preponderance” means something more than weight of evidence; it denotes superiority of

weight, or outweighing. That which best accords with reason and probability. The standard of proof in
most civil cases. It means the fact at issue is more likely true than not true—essentially, that the evidence
weighs slightly in favor of one side. (Blacks Law Dictionary (abridged 4th Edition, 1984 and 12th Edition,
2024)

SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                              Page 4 of 20
               streets, sewers, water, drainage, schools, fire, and police resources.
            4. Unusual conditions, trends, and needs have arisen since the district
               boundaries and rules were established.
            5. The land upon which the proposed use is sought is unsuited for the
               uses permitted within the district.

         In addition, recent changes to Chapter 205, HRS, in 2014 and 2018, required
         that solar energy facilities may be permitted on land with LSB Class B or C
         lands for which a Special Permit is granted provided that:
             • The area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made available
                for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty
                percent below the fair market rent for comparable properties;
             • Proof of financial security to decommission the facility is provided to the
                satisfaction of the appropriate county planning commission prior to the
                date of the commencement of commercial generation; and
             • Solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned at the owner’s expense
                and according to certain requirements.
       The County Planning Commission’s Decision and Order should contain
       findings of fact that address these guidelines and provisions.

 2.     BACKGROUND INFORMATION and PROCEEDURAL MATTERS
        On January 5, 2026, the Applicant Ka‘awanui Solar, LLC, AES Solar,
        (“Petitioner” or “Applicant”), filed an application together with a Standard Zoning
        Permit Application, General Class III and IV Requirement Checklist, Process
        Election Form, Checklist of State Special Permit Application Requirements,
        Authorizations of Applicant, Owner and Lessee, Ka‘awanui Solar Project Report
        with the County of Kaua‘i (“County”) to construct and operate a solar energy
        facility on the Project Site (the "Project"). The Project Site consists of an
        approximately 269.195 acre portion of land located in Makaweli, Waimea,
        Kaua‘i, Hawai'i, identified by Kaua‘i Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 (por.)
        ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.) ("Parcel 10"). The Project Site is owned by Robinson
        Family Partners and managed by Gay & Robinson, Inc., both of which have
        granted the Applicant with an option to acquire easements to operate the Project
        on the Project Site.

        The Project Site (the "Project") consists of an approximately 269.195 acre
        portion of land located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by
        Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.)
        ("Parcel 10"), and will include the following improvements ("Project
        Improvements"): a solar photovoltaic (“PV”) system with solar panels and
        racking system; power conversion stations; a Battery Energy Storage System
        ("BESS"); a network of electrical collector lines; communications equipment; an

SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
        Operations & Maintenance Shed; an AES Hawai'i Substation; a Kaʻawanui
        Substation and interconnection lines (which will be transferred to Kauaʻi Island
        Utility Cooperative “KIUC”); fencing; and access roads.

        By letter dated January 13, 2026, the Planning Director found the Application to
        be complete effective January 12, 2026, and began processing the Application
        pursuant to Section 8-3.1 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance ("CZO") as
        contained in Title IV, Chapter 8 of the Kaua‘i County Code, 1987.

        By Notice of Public Hearing published in The Garden Island newspaper, a
        newspaper of general circulation in the County of Kaua‘i, the Planning Director
        provided notice to the public that the agency hearing with a public hearing and
        an opportunity for public testimony would be held on the Application on March
        10, 2026, at 9:00 a.m. or shortly thereafter, at the Līhu‘e Civic Center, Moikeha
        Building, Meeting Room 2A-2B, 4444 Rice Street, Līhu‘e, Kaua‘i, Hawai‘i.

        On February 6, 2026, the Applicant mailed a Notice of Public Hearing pursuant
        to CZO Section 8-3.1(f), Section 1-13-5(d) of the Rules of Practice and
        Procedure of The Planning Commission of The County of Kaua‘i ("P.C. Rules")
        to 85% of owners of parcels located within 300 feet of Parcels 6 and 10.


       On February 6, 2026, the Applicant mailed an Affidavit as to Mailing of Notice to
       the Planning Director in compliance with CZO Section 8-3.1(f), the receipt of
       which was acknowledged by the Planning Department on February 9, 2026.

       At its February 24, 2026, meeting, the Planning Commission received the
       Planning Director's Report on the Application prepared in compliance with CZO
       Section 8-3.1(f)(3).

       At its March 10, 2026, meeting, the Planning Commission approved, by a vote of
       a majority of the members of the Planning Commission, Use Permit No. U-2026-
       9 and Class IV Zoning Permit No. Z-IV-2026-12, and recommended approval of
       Special Permit No. SP-2026-4 to the State Land Use Commission ("SLUC"),
       subject to the twenty-four (24) conditions of approval contained in the Decision
       and Order.

       On April 28, 2026, SLUC sent the agenda to the Kaua‘i County and Statewide
       email and mailing lists.

       On May 4, 2026, the County transferred the record to the SLUC, and the record
       was posted to the LUC website available for public review.




SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                              Page 6 of 20
 3.     SUMMARY OF PETITIONER’S MOTION
        On January 5, 2026, the Applicant Ka‘awanui Solar, LLC, AES Solar,
        (“Petitioner” or “Applicant”), filed an application together with a Checklist of State
        Special Permit Application Requirements, Authorizations of Applicant, Owner
        and Lessee, and Ka‘awanui Solar Project Report with the County of Kaua‘i
        (“County”) to construct and operate a solar energy facility on the Project Site
        (the "Project"). The Project Site consists of an approximately 269.195 acre
        portion of land located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kaua‘i, Hawai‘i, owned by
        Robinson Family Partners and managed by Gay & Robinson, Inc., both of which
        have granted the Applicant with an option to acquire easements to operate the
        Project on the Project Site.

        The Project will include the following improvements ("Project Improvements"): a
        solar photovoltaic (“PV”) system with solar panels and racking system; power
        conversion stations; a Battery Energy Storage System ("BESS"); a network of
        electrical collector lines; communications equipment; an Operations &
        Maintenance Shed; an AES Hawai'i Substation; a Kaʻawanui Substation and
        interconnection lines (which will be transferred to Kauaʻi Island Utility
        Cooperative “KIUC”); fencing; and access roads.

        Land Ownership Exhibit 8
        The land owned by Robinson Family Partners and managed by Gay &
        Robinson, Inc., both of which have granted the Applicant with an option to
        acquire easements to operate the Project on the Project Site.
        - Robinson Family Partners, will grant temporary site control to AES Hawaiʻi
           for the duration of the project’s contract term
        - Kaʻawanui Solar is a temporary land use (up to 44 years). AES Hawaiʻi will
           remove all infrastructure from the land at the end of the project’s contract
           term and restore the land to its existing state or comparable.
        - AES Hawaiʻi will not commence construction until all necessary permits and
           approvals are obtained.
        - The Owner also acknowledges that (1) it has entered into that certain Option
           Agreement with Ka‘awanui Solar, LLC (“Ka‘awanui”) that provides Ka‘awanui
           the right to enter into an Easement Agreement with the Owner for the above-
           referenced Property for a Construction Term of 3 years, with two options to
           extend the Construction Term for 6 months each and an Operating Tem of
           25 years, with three options to extend the Operating Term for 5 years each,
           for a maximum total Easement Agreement term of 44 years, and (2) the
           land uses described in the petition for Special Permit are consistent with the
           allowed land uses in the Option Agreement and future Easement Agreement.


        Land Study Bureau (“LSB”) and Agriculture Plan Exhibit 4, pg. 195
        Land Classification Map (Island of Kaua‘i) (Land Study Bureau, University of
        Hawai'i), the Over-all Productivity Rating for most of the lands within the Project


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
        Site is Class B. The Project Site is also designated as Agricultural Lands
        Important to the State of Hawai'i ("ALISH").

        HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21) permits Solar Energy Facilities on lands with soil
        classified by the LSB’s detailed land classification as overall (master)
        productivity rating B or C for which a special permit is granted pursuant to HRS
        Section 205-6; provided that:
              (a) The area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made available
                  for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty
                  percent below the fair market rent for comparable properties;
              (b) Proof of financial security to decommission the facility is provided to
                  the satisfaction of the appropriate county planning commission prior to
                  date of commencement of commercial generation; and
              (c) Solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned at the owner's
                  expense according to the following requirements:
                  (i) Removal of all equipment related to the solar energy facilities within
                       12 months of the conclusion of operation or useful life; and
                  (ii) Restoration of the disturbed earth to substantially the same
                       physical condition as existed prior to the development of the solar
                       energy facilities.

        Petitioner asserts that the Project will help provide additional electric
        generation and storage resources for agricultural activities on Kaua‘i. The
        Project will have no negative impact on surrounding agricultural uses, and will
        remove only a minimal amount of land from the 136,908 acres of lands
        available within the SLUC Agricultural District on Kaua‘i.

        As discussed in the Compatible Agriculture Plan Feasibility Assessment
        attached as Exhibit 4, pg. 195, the Applicant will lease the usable portions of
        the Project Site for Agricultural Activities at rates which are at least 50%
        below the fair market rental value.

        The Kaua‘i Planning Commission finds the Project has satisfied the
        requirements of HRS Section 205-4.5(a)(21), HRS 205-6, AR Section 15-15-
        95(d), CZO Sections 8-8.4, 8-9.4, 8-3.1(f) and 8-3.2(f), and PC Rules Section 1-
        13-5. (Exhibit 41, Pg. 60)

        Condition 2 of the County Decision and Order:
             Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall
             be made available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at
             least 50 percent below the fair market rent for comparable properties, as
             long as the Project is in operation. Compatible agricultural operations shall
             be established by the Applicant and its successors and/or assigns within 6
             months of the start of commercial power generation. Extensions to this
             deadline may be granted by the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
              Department for unforeseen extenuating circumstances. Additional
              consideration may be given if the Applicant is actively seeking to have
              such operations established


        Solar Panels Exhibit 2
        The proposed ground mounted solar panels will be on a single-axis tracking
        system, which will tilt the panels along a horizontal axis to follow the sun as it
        moves across the sky from east to west. The average height of the Solar Panels
        will be five (5) feet off the ground at a stow position where the panels are flat. As
        they rotate, their highest point will reach eight (8) feet high. Given the height of
        the panels, there will be room for people to move under and around the system
        with ease.

        Additionally, the rows of panels will be spaced at a distance, which is greater
        than a typical fixed tilt ground mount system. This will allow for people and
        vehicles to pass between rows with ease. The large distance between rows is
        required to ensure panels do not shade each other. It also serves a greater
        purpose of allowing infiltration of runoff water to the vegetation between the
        panels. The total amount of new impervious surface from the Project
        Improvements will be very minimal.

        The ground-mounted fixed-tilt racking system modules will stand about 6-8 feet
        above ground level when flat and each PV panel is approximately 48 inches
        wide and 79 inches long and dark in color.

        Battery Energy Storage System (“BESS”) Exhibit 2
        The BESS Containers will be ten (10) feet in height, eight
        (8) feet in width, and twenty (20) feet in length. The BESS Containers will
        include the lithium ion battery modules. In addition, each BESS Container will
        have several layers of protection to avoid failures and to contain hazards in the
        event of a failure. There will be forty-four (44) BESS Containers located adjacent
        to the AES Hawai'i Substation

        Decommissioning Exhibit 2
        As described in Exhibit 4; Exhibit L, pg. 263, following the life and operation
        of the Project under the Project GOE, the Applicant will remove the solar
        energy facility which includes the following: (1) solar panels and racking
        system, including steel posts, (2) power conversion stations (3) BESSs,
        including batte1y units and batte1y modules, inverters and transfo1mers, and
        other auxiliary equipment (4) AES Hawai'i Substation and related
        components including communication, operations, and security equipment,
        (5) electrical wiring and connections, and (6) fencing and gates. The
        Applicant will cover up all pit holes, trenches, other borings, or excavations;
        reseed the soil with appropriate grass seed if necessary; and will otherwise


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                Page 9 of 20
        return the land to substantially the same condition as its original condition.
        The Applicant will provide proof of financial security to decommission the
        facility as required by HRS §205-4.5(a)(21).


        Traditional and Cultural, native Hawaiian, and Ka Paʻakai O Ka Aina
        Exhibit 4; Exhibit X, pg. 915
        Planning Commission Decision and Order, Exhibit 41 FOF 147 and 148
        147. Traditional or Cultural Practices. An analysis of the traditional or cultural
        practices occurring on or related to the Project Site have been addressed in the
        Archaeological Reports, in the Community Outreach Report, in the Cultural
        Impact Assessment and Ka Pa‘akai Analysis for Ka‘awanui Project (Cultural
        Surveys Hawaii, Inc.), and in the Cultural Study (collectively, the "Ka Pa‘akai
        Report"). The conclusion contained in the Ka Pa'akai Report is that the Project
        will have no impact on any known traditional or customary practices of native
        Hawaiians within the Project Site. As noted in the Ka Pa‘akai Report, no
        traditional cultural properties were identified as existing, and no traditional
        cultural practices were identified as taking place, within the Project Site or its
        vicinity.
        148.Summary of Impacts on Traditional or Cultural Practices. In summary, the
        Project will have no impact on any known traditional or customary practices of
        native Hawaiians for the following reasons:
               a. There are no known traditional or customary practices of native
               Hawaiians that are presently occurring within the Project Site.
               b. There are no special gathering practices taking place within any portion
               of the Project Site.
               c. The Project will not detrimentally affect: access to any streams; access
               to the shoreline or other adjacent shoreline areas; or gathering along any
               streams, the shoreline or in the ocean.
               d. There are no known religious practices taking place within the Project
               Site.
               e. There are no known pre-contact cultural or historic sites or resources
               located within the Project Site.
               f. There are no known burials within the Project Site.


 4.     SUMMARY OF COUNTY OF KAUAʻI PLANNING DEPARTMENT
        POSITION STATEMENT and PLANNING COMMISSION
        RECCOMENDATION
        The County of Kauaʻi Planning Commission transferred the record to the Land
        Use Commission on May 4, 2026.

       Transmittal Exhibit List
          Exhibit Description


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                               Page 10 of 20
             1      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    January 5, 2026, regarding the Ka‘awanui Project Application submittal.
             2      Ka‘awanui Project Application dated January 5, 2026.
             3      G70’s project documents dated January 2026.
             4      G70’s Exhibits to project documents dated January 2026.
             5      General Class III and IV Requirements Checklist.
             6      Checklist of State Special Permit Requirements.
             7      Authorization of Applicant.
             8      Authorization of Owner and Lessee.
             9      Letter from the Planning Department to Belles Graham LLP dated January
                    13, 2026, regarding the acceptance of the Ka‘awanui Project application.
            10      Planning Department — Standard Zoning Permit Application.
            11      Planning Department — Permit/Petition Intake Form.
            12      Planning Department — Application Fee Receipt.
            13      Planning Department — Notice of Public Hearing/Notification of
                    Procedures.
            14      Planning Department — Agency Routing Form.
            15      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    February 6, 2026, regarding the submission of the Affidavit As To Mailing
                    Of Notice.
            16      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    March 2, 2026, regarding the submission of an ADA-Compliant digital
                    version of the Application dated January 5, 2026, together with the
                    Ka‘awanui Solar Project Report and Exhibits, Ka‘awanui Solar+Storage
                    Power Point presentation, and the Applicant’s Witness List and Exhibit
                    List.
            17      Applicant’s Witness List.
            18      Applicant’s Exhibit List.
            19      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    March 3, 2026, regarding the submission of an ADA-Compliant digital
                    version of the Application dated January 5, 2026, together with the
                    Ka‘awanui Solar Project Report and Exhibits and the Ka‘awanui
                    Solar+Storage Power Point presentation.
            20      Ka‘awanui Solar+Storage Power Point presentation.
            21      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    March 9, 2026, regarding a final, revised version in Word format (clean
                    and redlined) of the Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision
                    And Order, concerning revisions to Conditions as written in the Director’s
                    Report.
            22      Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision And Order (Clean
                    Version).
            23      Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision And Order (Redlined
                    Version).
            24      Planning Commission Meeting Notice and Agenda (March 10, 2026).



SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                 Page 11 of 20
            25      Ka‘awanui Project Application – Item G.2.a. of the March 10, 2026,
                    Planning Commission Agenda.
            26      Director’s Report – Item G.2.a.1 of the March 10, 2026, Planning
                    Commission Agenda.
            27      Transmittal of Agency Comments to Planning Commission dated March 4,
                    2026 — Item G.2.a.2 of the March 10, 2026, Planning Commission
                    Agenda.
            28      Transmittal of Public Testimony to Planning Commission dated March 4,
                    2026 — Item G.2.a.3 of the March 10, 2026, Planning Commission
                    Agenda.
            29      Transmittal of Agency Comments to Planning Commission dated March 9,
                    2026.
            30      Items received by the Planning Department less than 24 hours prior to the
                    March 10, 2026, Planning Commission meeting (Document dated March
                    10, 2026).
            31      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    March 16, 2026, regarding a final, revised version in Word format (clean
                    and redlined) of the Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision
                    And Order, concerning revisions to Conditions as written in the Director’s
                    Report and as further amended by the Planning Commission.
            32      Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision And Order (Clean
                    Version).
            33      Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision And Order (Redlined
                    Version).
            34      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    March 25, 2026, regarding the submission of the Original Transcript of the
                    March 10, 2026, proceedings for review.
            35      Original Transcript .
            36      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    April 6, 2026, confirming that Belles Graham LLP has no recommended
                    corrections to the Original Transcript and concurs with the designation of
                    the record as contained in Paragraph 10 of the Findings Of Fact,
                    Conclusions Of Law, And Decision And Order.
            37      Correspondence from Belles Graham LLP to Planning Director Hull dated
                    April 10, 2026, regarding the submission of the Sealed Original Transcript.
            38      Planning Commission Meeting Notice and Agenda (April 14, 2026).
            39      Sealed Original Transcript — Item D.3. of the April 14, 2026, Planning
                    Commission Agenda.
            40      Letter from the Clerk of the Kaua‘i Planning Commission to Belles Graham
                    LLP dated April 15, 2026, regarding the approval of the excerpt of the
                    March 10, 2026, Planning Commission Minutes concerning transcripts in
                    the matter of the Ka‘awanui Solar LLC Application.
            41      Executed Findings Of Fact, Conclusions Of Law, And Decision And Order.

        The County of Kaua‘i Planning Department Submittal (EXHBIT 26):


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
        Based on the Counties findings and evaluation, it is concluded that through
        proper mitigative measures and compliance efforts, the proposed development
        can be considered, and it should not have significant adverse impacts to the
        environment or the surrounding area. The proposal is generally in compliance
        with the criteria outlined for the granting of a Use Permit and Class IV Zoning
        Permit. In addition, the proposed development is consistent with the policies
        outlined in the General Plan, as well as the development standards prescribed
        by the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.

        It is further concluded that the Special Permit and Use Permit could be
        considered in that the proposed use should promote the overall goals and
        objectives of Chapter 205, HRS. While the proposal does not directly increase
        agricultural productivity, it is a permissible use under Chapter 205, HRS with a
        Special Permit.

        The Applicant should institute the "Best Management Practices" to ensure that
        the development does not generate impacts that may affect the health, safety,
        and welfare of those in the surrounding area of the proposal.

        Preliminary Recommendation
        Based on the foregoing evaluation and conclusion, it is hereby recommended
        that Class IV Zoning Permit Z-IV-2026-12, Use Permit U-2026-9, and Special
        Permit SP-2026-4, be APPROVED subject to the following conditions (listed 23).


        The County of Kaua‘i Planning Commission Recommendation:
        On March 10, ,2026, the Kauaʻi Planning Commission approved the
        recommendation of the Planning Department, and the motion having received
        the affirmative votes required by the CZO, the PC Rules, and HAR 15-15-13,
        and there being good cause for the motion, the Planning Commission hereby
        APPROVES the recommendation of the Planning Department approving a CZO
        Use Permit and CZO Class IV Zoning Permit for the Project (including the
        Ka‘awanui Substation), subject to 24 conditions.

        The Kaua‘i Planning Commission RECOMMENDS APPROVAL of the State
        Special Permit for the Project (not including the Ka‘awanui Substation), within
        the Project Site with modifications as proposed by the Planning Department and
        the Planning Commission and as agreed to by the Applicant (County Decision
        and Order, Exhibit 41).

Summary of the 24 Conditions in the County Decision and Order (Exhibit 41):
For full Conditions please refer to the County Decision and Order Exhibit 41
   1. Constructed as represented to the Planning Commission, and changes must be
        reported to the Planning Director

SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                             Page 13 of 20
   2. Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall be
      made available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50
      percent below the fair market rent for comparable properties
   3. If at any time during the term of the subject permits no compatible agricultural
      operations exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for 6 months, the
      Applicant shall notify the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department in
      writing within 30 days of the end of the 6-month period.
   4. The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the following
      from the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department, prior to the
      issuance of a grading or building permit:
      i) Survey map with metes and bounds of Petition Area
      ii) Site plan showing the area required under Condition 2, above, relating to the
           minimum land area to be made available for compatible agricultural use
   5. Prior to the closing of the building permit for the facility, the Applicant shall submit
      to the County of Kaua'i Planning Department proof of financial security, such as a
      letter of credit or similar assurance, from a creditworthy financial institution
      satisfactory to the County of Kaua'i Planning Department…The Applicant shall
      decommission the facility (not including the Ka‘awanui Substation), including the
      removal of all equipment related to the facility, within twelve (12) months
      following the termination of operations of the facility…
   6. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to flora on site as follows:
      i) Prior to initiating any ground-disturbing activities, the Applicant should identify
           and implement feasible measures to reasonably protect, replace or relocate
           any indigenous or native plant species, or cultural and natural resources
           within the project area, based on consultation with applicable governmental
           agencies.
   7. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:
      i) Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training module,
           which shall include all potential endangered species that may frequent the
           Petition Area.
      ii) All construction workers and solar facility employees shall undergo
           endangered species awareness training prior to starting work
      iii) In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed Threatened
           Species, Newell’s Shearwater and other seabirds, external lighting shall be
           only of the following types: shielded lights, cut-off luminaries, or indirect
           lighting. Spotlights aimed upward or spotlighting of structures, landscaping or
           the ocean shall be prohibited.
      iv) Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.
      v) Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring within the Project Site, and
           report occurrences to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ("USFWS").
      vi) Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing or grading activities from June 1
           through September 15.
   8. Applicant shall begin commercial operations of the Project within four (4) years of
      the date of the Land Use Commission's (LUC) Decision and Order approving the
      Special Permit… This Special Permit shall be valid for a period of thirty-five (35)


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                Page 14 of 20
       years from the date of the start of commercial operations of the Project, subject
       to further extensions upon a timely request for extension filed with the Planning
       Commission at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the Special Permit's
       expiration. Approval of time extensions shall not be required from the LUC.
   9. On or before December 31 of each year that the Special Permit is in effect, the
       Applicant or its successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, State of Hawai'I
       Office of Planning, and the County of Kaua'i Planning Department that
       demonstrates the Applicant’s compliance with conditions of the subject permits.
   10. Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to
       significant increases in the number of PV panels; (2) amendments to the
       conditions of approval;(3) significant expansions of the approved area; or (4)
       change in uses stated herein, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
       Planning Commission and the SLUC. Minor modifications including minor
       additions to accessory uses and structures, and new incidental…
   11. The Applicant shall notify the Director of the County of Kaua'I Planning
       Department of:
       i) Any change or transfer of the license on the Petition Area.
       ii) Any change in uses on the Petition Area.
       iii) Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or
       iv) Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.
   12. Enforcement of the conditions of the subject permits shall be enforced pursuant
       to the Rules of the Planning Commission, including the issuance of an order to
       show cause…
   13. If the PV array or the Project creates a hazardous condition for pilots or
       motorists, the facility operator shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon
       notification by the State of Hawai'i Department of Transportation…
   14. If required to mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping shall be installed and
       maintained around the Solar Project to screen it when viewed from Kaumualiʻi
       Highway…
   15. In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains, structural
       remains, cultural deposits… the find shall be protected from additional
       disturbance, and the State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD) and Kauaʻi
       Island Burial Council, as applicable, shall be contacted immediately.
   16. Project construction workers and all other personnel involved in the construction
       and related activities of the Project shall be informed of the possibility of
       inadvertent cultural finds, including human skeletal remains…
   17. In the event iwi kupuna and/or cultural finds are encountered during construction,
       Project proponents shall consult with cultural and lineal descendants of the area
       to develop a reinterment plan and cultural preservation plan for proper cultural
       protocol, curation, and long-term maintenance.
   18. The Applicant shall resolve and comply with all agency requirements as
       recommended in the permit application review, including but not limited to the
       permit requirements…
   19. The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices (BMP’s) to
       ensure the Project does not generate impacts that may affect the health, safety,


SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                             Page 15 of 20
          and welfare of those in the surrounding area of the proposal.
      20. The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building
          techniques and operational methods for the Project, such as Leadership in
          Energy and Environmental Design (L.E.E.D.) standards or another comparable
          state-approved…
      21. To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and applicable
          prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the Applicant shall seek to hire
          Kauaʻi contractors as long as they are qualified and reasonably competitive with
          other contractors, and shall seek to employ residents of Kauaʻi in temporary
          construction and permanent jobs…
      22. The Applicant is advised that prior to construction and/or use, additional
          government agency conditions may be imposed. It shall be the Applicant’s
          responsibility to resolve those conditions with the respective agency(ies).
      23. The Planning Commission reserves the right to revise, modify, add or delete
          conditions of approval in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts this
          project may create, or revoke the permits through the proper procedures should
          conditions of approval be violated or adverse impacts be created that cannot be
          properly addressed.
      24. The portion of the Project containing the Kaʻawanui Substation shall be subject to
          Conditions 1, 4a., 6, 7, 12, and 14 through 23, but shall not be subject to
          Conditions 2, 3, 4b., 5, 8 through 11, and 13.

 5.       SUMMARY OF POSITION STATEMENT FILED BY THE OFFICE OF
          PLANNING AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (“OPSD”)
          During the review of the County Record, Exhibit 14, indicates that the
          Application may not have transmitted to the LUC, OPSD, or Department of
          Agriculture and Biosecurity, resulting in a lack of comments for these agencies
          at the County Level.

          If during the hearing OPSD and DAB provide concerns or comments that were
          not addressed at the county level, LUC staff suggests remanding this Petition to
          the County for further development of the record (see secondary suggested
          motion).

          As of 5/5/2026, the Land Use Commission has not received comments from the
          OPSD, or the Department of Agriculture and Biosecurity (“DAB”).


 6.     STAFF ANALYSIS, CONCERNS, AND RECCOMENDATION
 Staff Concerns:
        During the review of the County Record, Exhibit 14, indicates that the
        Application was not transmitted to the LUC, OPSD, or Department of Agriculture
        and Biosecurity, resulting in a lack of comments for these agencies at the
        County Level.
        - Staff Suggests the Commission ask the Petitioner and County if the

SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                               Page 16 of 20
            Department of Agriculture and Office of Planning and Sustainable
            Development were consulted in the permitting process due to the use of
            agricultural land and implications of HRS 205 and 205A.

        If during the hearing OPSD and DAB provide concerns or comments that were
        not addressed at the county level, LUC staff suggests remanding this Petition to
        the County for further development of the record (see secondary suggested
        motion).

Staff Analysis:
       HRS 205-6 and HAR15-15-96(a) provides the alternative actions that may be
       taken by the LUC in its consideration of the Special Permit application. The LUC
       may approve, approve with modification, or deny the Application. The LUC may
       impose additional restrictions as may be necessary or appropriate in granting the
       approval. However, any modifications or additional restrictions must be based on
       the record as developed by the County Planning Commission. The LUC may
       also remand the Application to the Planning Commission for further proceedings
       if they determine that consideration of new information, relevant to the
       application, is warranted.

       Staff believes that sufficient information exists that the Petitioner has met the
       guidelines for a State Special Permit. The documented record from the County
       includes the Planning Commission’s record memorializing their decision and
       identifying the 24 conditions they recommended, the Special Permit application
       and supporting documents, the Planning Director’s Report, and approved hearing
       transcripts/minutes.

       Further, LUC Staff believes the proposed uses include the development of: solar
       energy facilities (within B rated lands); and utilities. The AES Hawai‘i Substation
       and the Ka‘awanui Substation are permitted uses pursuant to HRS Section 205-
       4.5(a)(7). The remainder of the Project is a use under HRS Sections 205-
       2(d)(6)(B) and 205-4.5(a)(21) which may be permitted, subject to the issuance of
       a Special Permit pursuant to HRS Section 205-6.

       Compliance With Requirements For SLUC Special Permit
       1.     Special Permit Requirements. The proposed Project meets the
       requirements for an SLUC Special Permit, as contained in Hawai'i Revised
       Statutes Section 205- 6 and in Section 15-15-95 of the Land Use Commission
       Rules as set forth herein.

       2.     The use will not be contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished
       by the HRS Chapter 205 and 205A , and SLUC Rules.



SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                             Page 17 of 20
       The proposed use will not interfere with other agricultural uses which are
       generally allowed within the SLUC Agricultural District as conditions require
       compatible agriculture uses on the lands of the Petition Area. It is consistent with
       solar facility uses which are allowed (with a Special Permit) in the SLUC
       Agricultural District. It is also located so as to minimize impacts on agricultural
       activities in this area.

       3.      The desired use will not adversely affect surrounding property. As
       discussed herein, the proposed use will be compatible with the surrounding
       neighborhood and uses, and will not generate any significant adverse impacts. It
       will not prevent surrounding lands from being used for agricultural purposes. The
       amount of additional traffic that will be generated as a result of this proposal will
       be insignificant and will not create any substantial adverse impacts.

       4.      The use will not unreasonably burden public agencies to provide roads
       and streets, sewers, water, drainage and school improvements, and police and
       fire protection. As discussed herein, no burden will be placed on public agencies
       to provide additional facilities, services, and utilities as a result of this proposal.
       Conversely, by providing an alternative green source of energy for electricity, it
       will promote the sustainability and availability of electrical production resources
       for the public.

       5.     Unusual conditions, trends and needs have arisen since the district
       boundaries and regulations were established. The State has recently recognized
       the need to promote alternative energy production, including solar energy
       production. Such facilities require large areas, as are available in the SLUC
       Agricultural District compared to the SLUC Urban District. Provided such new
       uses to not adversely impact surrounding agricultural activities, they are
       recognized as necessary and permissible in the SLUC Agricultural District.

       6.     The land on which the proposed use is sought is unsuited for the uses
       permitted with the District. To the extent feasible, the Applicant will continue to
       use the Project Site for Agricultural Activities as described in the Agricultural
       Plan. In addition, although the Project Site is suitable for agricultural uses, it is
       better suited at this time for the production of alternative energy production via
       the Project proposed herein.

Staff Recommendation:
Suggested Amendments to Conditions
       Condition 2 of the County Decision and Order
        LUC Staff suggests adding the language in red to condition 2 of the County
        Decision and Order, to ensure that the Agency with direct interest and
        involvement is included in time extensions.

SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall be
       made available for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50
       percent below the fair market rent for comparable properties, as long as the
       Project is in operation. Compatible agricultural operations shall be established by
       the Applicant and its successors and/or assigns within 6 months of the start of
       commercial power generation. Extensions to this deadline may be granted by the
       Director of the County of Kaua‘i Planning Department, after consultation with the
       Department of Agriculture and Biosecurity for unforeseen extenuating
       circumstances. Additional consideration may be given if the Applicant is actively
       seeking to have such operations established
       Condition 8 of the County Decision and Order
        LUC Staff suggests adding the language in red to condition 8 of the County
        Decision and Order, to ensure that the LUC; the State permitting body with
        direct interest and involvement is included in time extensions. Conditions with
        this language are present in other Special Permits involving Solar
        Developments, see SP21-412 (Condition 3)

        Applicant shall begin commercial operations of the Project within four (4) years
        of the date of the Land Use Commission's (LUC) Decision and Order approving
        the Special Permit… This Special Permit shall be valid for a period of thirty-five
        (35) years from the date of the start of commercial operations of the Project,
        subject to further extensions upon a timely request for extension filed with the
        Planning Commission at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the
        Special Permit's expiration. Approval of time extensions shall not be required
        from the LUC. Approval of Special Permit time extensions shall be required from
        the Land Use Commission.

        Condition 11 of the County Decision and Order
       The Applicant shall notify the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning
       Department and the Land Use Commission of:
          (1) Any change or transfer of the license on the Petition Area.
          (2) Any change in uses on the Petition Area.
          (3) Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or
          (4) Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.


       With the following recommended changes to Conditions 2, 8, and 11, to clarify
       the importance of consultation to DAB prior to granting extensions for
       establishing required agricultural operations, adding LUC approval for any
       requested time extensions for the Special Permit, and include the LUC to be
       notified by Applicant for any changes in lease, ownership, or use of the Petition
       Area.




SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                             Page 19 of 20
Suggested Motion based on Staff Recommendation:
     The LUC Staff recommends the Commission approve the Ka‘awanui Solar
     Special Permit Application for solar development on approximately 269.195
     acre portion of land located in Makaweli, Waimea, Kauaʻi, Hawaiʻi, identified by
     Kauaʻi Tax Map Key Nos. (4) 1-7-006:006 (por.) ("Parcel 6”) and 010 (por.)
     (“Parcel 10”), subject to the 24 County Conditions and the three additional
     Condition amendments from the LUC Staff, adopt the condition language in
     the Counties Decision and Order, and authorize the Chairperson to execute
     the order necessary to effectuate the Commission’s decision, subject to
     review and approval by the Department of the Attorney General.


Secondary Motion if OPSD and DAB provide comments and concerns not on
County Record
     Due to new evidence introduced by __, the LUC remands this back to Kauaʻi
     County for further proceedings to complete the record.




SP26-416 AES Kaʻawanui Solar
Staff Report –Special Permit Application
                                                                        Page 20 of 20
