     Outlook
                                                                                        05/11/2026
New Public Testimony                                                                       9:36 am
                                                                                         STATE OF HAWAII
From webmaster@hawaii.gov <webmaster@hawaii.gov>                                      LAND USE COMMISSION
Date Mon 5/11/2026 7:31 AM
To   DBEDT LUC <dbedt.luc.web@hawaii.gov>



Name

     Carrice Gardner

Email



ZIP / Postal Code

     96754

Representing

     Self

Agenda Item

     Docket No. SP26-416 Kaawanui Solar, LLC

Position

     Support

Attachment (if any)


             C.Gardner-Supportive-Testimony-for-Kaawanui-Solar-5.13.pdf


Testimony

     Please find attached my letter of support for Kaawanui Solar, Docket SP26-416.
May 8, 2026

Carrice Gardner



To: The Honorable Members of the State of Hawai'i Land Use Commission

RE: Docket SP26-416 Kaawanu i Solar, LLC

Aloha Chair and Commissioners,

I am writing to offer my strong support for the Kaawanu i Solar project and its contribution
to a more sustainable, resilient, and affordable Kaua'i.

Having grown up on Kaua'i, I have seen firsthand how our island has become a leader in the
clean energy transition through local decision-making. Kaua'i Island Utility Cooperative
(KIUC) has demonstrated that we can reduce dependence on imported fossil fuels while
improving affordab ility, reliability, and resilience. Building on this progress, Kaawanu i Solar
is expected to provide an additional 17.5% of the island's energy, delivering stable, low­
cost power for 25 years while strengthening the grid with battery storage. The project's
integration plans to incorporate farming will also support local food production and
contribute to Kaua'i's food security.

This project is especially important as we witness increasing climate impacts and contend
with rising fuel prices. Our reliance on imported fuel for energy exposes residents and
businesses to price volatility, while locally generated solar energy offers price stability,
energy independence, and reduced emissions. These benefits directly support healthier,
more resilient communities.

As an AES Hawai'i employee, I can attest that community engagement has been central to
this project. Our reach has included meetings with community organizations and elected
officials, open houses, and a public meeting, with continued opportunities for input. The
project has also undergone environmental, cultural, and archaeological review, reflecting a
commitment to thoughtful, responsible development. A decommissioning plan is in place
to ensure the site is restored at the end of its 25-year life, reinforcing responsible land
stewardship.

Kaawanui Solar will also provide economic benefits through local jobs and workforce
development. AES Hawai'i prioritizes local hiring, and I am proud to work alongside
graduates from Kapa'a High School, Waimea High School, and Kaua'i Community College.
We are all proud to be part of a team, working towards a more sustainable future, and it is
especially meaningful to know that projects like this create meaningful, well-paying
employment opportunities for our residents.
