                                                                                                     05/04/2026
                                                                                                        9:41 am
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING                                                                                STATE OF HAWAII
                                                                                                   LAND USE COMMISSION
KA'AINA HULL, DIRECTOR
JODI A. HIGUCHI SAYEGUSA, DEPUTY DIRECTOR
                                                                              DEREK S.K. KAWAKAMI, MAYOR
                                                                         REIKO MATSUYAMA, MANAGING DIRECTOR




                                   DIRECTOR'S REPORT
 I.    SUMMARY

       Action Required by          Consideration of Class IV Zoning Permit, Use Permit, and Special
       Planning Commission:        Permit to allow construction and use of a new solar energy facility and
                                   associated site improvements.

       Permit Application Nos.     Class IV Zoning Permit Z-IV-2026-12
                                   Use Permit U-2026-9
                                   Special Permit SP-2026-4

       Name of Applicant(s)        KAAWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
                                   Belles Graham LLP, Authorized Agent
                                   Matsubara Kotake & Tabata, Authorized Agent

 II.   PERMIT INFORMATION

                                            PERMITS REQUIRED
       [8] Use Permit                   Pursuant to Section 8-2.4(r)(22) of the Kaua'i County Code (KCC),
                                        1987, as amended, solar energy facilities are a permitted use
                                        within the County of Kaua'i Agriculture Zoning District on lands
                                        with soil classified by the State of Hawai'i Land Study Bureau
                                        detailed land classification as overall productivity rating class B
                                        and C, provided that the project area does not occupy more than
                                        ten percent (10%) of the acreage of the parcel, or 20 acres of
                                        land, whichever is less. Since the project area occupies more
                                        than 20 acres of land, a Use Permit is required.

                                        Pursuant to Section 8-2.4(s)(16) of the Kaua'i County Code (KCC),
                                        1987, as amended, a Use Permit is required for private and
                                        public utilities facilities in the County of Kaua'i Agriculture
                                        Zoning District.

                                        Pursuant to Section 8-2.4(u)(14) of the Kaua'i County Code
                                        (KCC), 1987, as amended, a Use Permit is required for utility
                                        installations within the County of Kaua'i Open (O) Zoning
                                        District.
       D Project Development Use
          Permit
       D Variance Permit

                                                        G.2.a.1. MAR
                                                          10, 2026
                                                                                  -1-1- ,i,x.a.,.
                                                                                     FEB 2 1t 2026
           [gJ Special Permit                              Pursuant to Section 205-2(c)(6)(B) of the Hawai'i Revised
                                                           Statutes, a Special Permit is required for solar energy facilities
                                                           located on lands with soil classified as overall productivity rating
                                                           class B and C, and which the project area occupies more than ten
                                                           percent (10%) of the parcel's total acreage, or 20 acres,
                                                           whichever is less. Since the project area occupies more than 20
                                                           acres of land, a Special Permit is required.
           [gJ Zoning Permit Class                         Pursuant to Section 8-3.1 of the KCC, 1987, as amended, a Class
                 [gl1v                                     IV Zoning Permit is a procedural requirement in applying for a
                 0 Ill                                     Use Permit.
           DSpecial Management Area
               Permit
                 Duse
                    □
                    Minor
                                                                 A MENDMENTS
           DZoning Amendment
           D General Plan Amendment
           D State Land Use District
             Amendment

              Date of Receipt of Completed Application:
                                                         January 12, 2026
                              Date of Director's Report: February 9, 2026
                                 Date of Public Hearing: March 10, 2026
               Deadline Date for PC to Take Action (60TH
                                                   Day): April 19, 2026

Ill.      PROJECT DATA

                                                  PROJECT INFORMATION
                Parcel Location: The project site is located on lands located on the mauka side of Kaumuali'i
                                 Highway in Makaweli, directly across from the Makaweli Post Office facility,
                                 and situated along Ka'awanui Village Road.
                Tax Map Key(s): (4) 1-7-006: 006 (por.) and 010 (por.)        Area: Project Area: 269.195
                                                                                      Acres
                                                                                      Overall Parcel Area:
                                                                                      5,006.74 Acres
                                                      ZONING & DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                            Zoning: Agriculture (Ag) and Open (0)
                                             State Land Use District: Agricultural
                                         General Plan Designation:    Agriculture

                                                                                                           21P age
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directofs Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                                                         Height Limit:   Fifty (SO) feet
                                                  Max. Land Coverage:    60%
                                                        Front Setback:   10'-0"
                                                        Rear Setback:    5' or½ the wall plate height whichever is greater
                                                         Side Setback:   5' or½ the wall plate height whichever is greater
                                  Community Plan Area:                   West Kaua'i Community Plan
                  Community Plan Land Use Designation:                   N/A
                     Deviations or Variances Requested:                  N/A


IV.       LEGAL REQUIREMENTS

                            Section 8-3.l{f), KCC: This report is being transmitted to the Applicant and
                                                            Planning Commission in order to satisfy the requirements
                                                            of Section 8-3.l(f), relating to the provision of the
                                                            Planning Director's report and recommendation on the
                                                            subject proposal within sixty (60) days of the filing of a
                                                            completed application. The application was received on
                                                            January 12, 2026, and the Applicant, through its
                                                            authorized agent, was notified accordingly of the Planning
                                                            Department's intent to commence permit processing.
                             Public Hearing Date:           March 10, 2026


V.        PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND USE

          The Applicant proposes to construct a 52-megawatt direct current (DC) and 43-megawatt
          alternating current (AC) solar energy facility, encompassing approximately 269.195 acres of
          the subject property (approximately 5,006.74 acres). The proposed development will consist
          of the following components:

                 •      Installation and operation of a ground mounted solar photo-voltaic system with solar
                        panels and racking system. The solar panels will be mounted on single-axis trackers
                        that will rotate along a fixed horizontal axis from east to west, tracking the
                        movement of the sun. The average height of the solar panels will be five (S) feet off
                        the ground when in a flat position, with a maximum height of eight (8) feet when
                        panels rotate;
                 •      Installation of power conversion stations;
                 •      Installation of a 172-megawatt hour battery energy storage system;
                 •      Installation and operation of two new substations consisting of the AES Hawai'i
                        Substation and the Ka'awanui Substation, along with associated interconnection
                        lines. The substations will include shield wire metal masts approximately 45 feet in
                        height at the AES Hawai'i Substation and 60 to 70 foot in height at the Ka'awanui
                        Substation;

                                                                                                            31Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                   •     A network of electrical collector lines;
                   •     Communications equipment;
                   •     Installation of an operations and maintenance shed that will be 12 feet in height with
                         an overall building footprint of approximately 840 square feet for office purposes,
                         remote site monitoring, equipment, and storage.

          The solar project site will consist of six (6) fenced solar array areas, each enclosed by a seven
          (7) foot high chain link perimeter fence. Access roads will be provided throughout the site to
          serve all major equipment, and the solar panels will be spaced to allow vehicle access
          between rows. New landscaping will be installed and maintained around the project site to
          mitigate visual impacts. As shown in the Preliminary Landscape Site Plan dated September
          2025, the Applicant proposes to install a row of indigenous and endemic plants along the
          portion of the project perimeter adjacent to Kaumuali'i Highway.

VI.       APPLICANT'S REASONS/JUSTIFICATION

          Please refer to the Application.

VII.      AGENCY COMMENTS

            Comments from applicable government agencies are being sought and are expected at the
            time of the public hearing scheduled for MARCH 10, 2026. At the present time, the
            department has only received comments from the COK Transportation Agency, and the State
            Department of Health, and has not received comments from other reviewing agencies that
            includes the COK Public Works - Engineering Division (DPW) and COK Water (DOW).
            However, comments are being anticipated and will be presented at the public hearing.

VIII. FINDINGS

          1. Project Site and Surroundings
             The subject property is located within the County's Agriculture (Ag) and Open (0) zoning
             districts and the State Land Use Agricultural District. The surrounding properties to the
             north, south, east, and west are similarly zoned; however, located immediately northeast
             of the project area is the Ka'awanui Village Urban Zoning Expansion Area that was recently
             rezoned from the State Land Use Agricultural District to the Urban District, and from the
             County's Agriculture District to the Plantation Camp (PC) Zoning District.

                The project site is situated adjacent to Kaumuali'i Highway and extends approximately one
                (1) mile mauka along both sides of Ka'awanui Village Road. The project area comprises of
                pastureland and fallow agricultural fields, with surrounding areas consisting of former
                plantation lands repurposed for grazing or left in open pasture.

                Located approximately one hundred (100) yards northeast from nearest point of the
                project area is Ka'awanui Village, which consists of residential structures. Immediately
                northwest of the project area is a residential dwelling on TMK: 1-7-006: 011.
                Approximately 250 yards further northwest is another residential dwelling situated within
                the project's subject parcel TMK: 1-7-006: 006.

                                                                                                   41Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
           2. Access
              Ingress and egress to the project site will be provided via Ka'awanui Village Road, an
              improved private roadway that connects to Kaumuali'i Highway, as well as a separate
              access connection to Kaumuali'i Highway located approximately 0.2 miles west of the
              Ka'awanui Village Road and Kaumuali'i Highway intersection.

          3. Soils
             The Detailed Land Classification Study prepared by the Land Study Bureau (LSB) identifies
             the soils of the affected parcels containing a combination of Class "B" & "C" soils. The
             study provides a "five class" productivity rating from "A" to "E", with "A" representing the
             class of highest productivity and "E" representing the lowest. As represented, the solar
             facilities will occupy areas with primarily LSB B-rated soils and some LSB C-rated soils.

          4. Flood Zones
             The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Map shows the
             project site is situated within the flood zone identified as Zone 'X'. FEMA has identified
             those areas within the Zone "X" to be outside the 0.2% annual chance floodplain.

IX.       PRELIMINARY EVALUATION

          In evaluating the Applicant's request to construct and operate the proposed solar energy
          facility, the following should be considered:

          1. Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS), Section 205
                Under HRS §205-4.5, solar energy facilities are a permissible use within the State Land Use
                Agricultural District on Class B or C soils, subject to the following requirements:

                  a.     HRS §205-4.S(a)(20) specifies:

                         "(20} Solar energy facilities that do not occupy more than ten per cent of the acreage
                               of the parcel, or twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser or for which a special
                               use permit is granted pursuant to section 205-6... "

                                      o      The Applicant has applied for a Special Permit in accordance with this
                                             subsection.

                  b. HRS §205-4.S(a)(21) further specifies:

                         "(21) Solar energy facilities on lands with soil classified by the land study bureau's
                               detailed land classification as overall (master) productivity rating B or Cfor
                               which a special use permit is granted pursuant to section 205-6; provided that:

                                    (A)      The area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made available for
                                             compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty per
                                             cent below the fair market rent for comparable properties;



                                                                                                              SI Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                                       o     The Applicant has made design considerations to maximize contiguous
                                             space between solar panels for agricultural cultivation and to enable as
                                             many agricultural uses as possible. As identified in the application, AES
                                             has selected Kawailana, Inc. as an agricultural partner for the project. As
                                             represented, AES intends to provide lease-free use of the project land,
                                             thereby exceeding this requirement.

                                    (B}      Proof of financial security to decommission the facility is provided to the
                                             satisfaction of the appropriate county planning commission before the
                                             date of commencement of commercial generation; and

                                       o     The Applicant acknowledges this requirement and will be required to
                                             provide proof of financial security prior to the closing of the building
                                             permit for the solar energy facility.

                                    {C}      Solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned at the owner's expense
                                             according to the following requirements:

                                              (i} Removal of all equipment related to the solar energy facility within
                                                  twelve months of the conclusion of operation or useful life; and

                                              (ii} Restoration of the disturbed earth to substantially the same physical
                                                   condition as existed before the development of the solar energy
                                                   facility."

                                      o      The Applicant acknowledges this requirement. Please refer to the
                                             Applicant's Decommissioning Plan in Exhibit L of the application.

          2. Special Permit

                Pursuant to Chapter 205 of the Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) and Chapter 13 of the
                Planning Commission Rules of Practice and Procedure, a SPECIAL PERMIT may be
                approved under such protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary if the
                Commission finds that the proposed use is an unusual and reasonable use of land
                situated within the State Land Use Agricultural District, and that the use would
                promote the effectiveness and objectives of Chapter 205, HRS. The Planning
                Commission shall consider the following guidelines in determining unusual and
                reasonable use:

                    1) Such use shall not be contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished by
                       Chapters 205 and 205A a/the Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS}, and the rules of the
                       State Land Use Commission;

                          The proposed development will not be contrary to any of the State objectives
                          for the following reasons:




                                                                                                             GI Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                               o     The useable portions of the site will be leased for pasture purposes at a
                                     rate or rates that are at least fifty percent (50%) below the fair market
                                     rental value. As represented, AES intends to provide lease-free use of the
                                     project land, thereby exceeding this requirement.

                               o     The proposed use will not interfere with other agricultural uses that are
                                     generally allowed within the Agricultural District.

                              o      Following the anticipated twenty-five (25) to forty (40) year life and
                                     operation of the solar facility, all equipment can either be retrofitted with
                                     new equipment or will be removed from the site, and the site will be
                                     restored to its preconstruction condition.

                    2} The desired use would not adversely affect the surrounding property;

                                o     The construction and operation of the proposed solar facility is not
                                      expected to have adverse effects on surrounding properties. The
                                      development is not anticipated to generate significant increases in
                                      traffic, population, noise levels, or air quality impacts. While there may
                                      be minimal visual impacts from Kaumuali'i Highway, these impacts can
                                      be mitigated through appropriate visual screening or other design
                                      measures. Additionally, the glare produced by the project is anticipated
                                      to be minimal and is predicted to affect only certain interior roadways
                                      mauka of Kaumuali'i Highway during specific times of the day and during
                                      certain times of the year. Glare is not predicted for Kaumuali'i Highway
                                      as well as for the residential houses and structures located within the
                                      vicinity of the project.

                                o     The proposed use will be compatible with the surrounding area, and it
                                      will not prevent surrounding lands from being used for agricultural
                                      purposes.

                                o     During construction, Best Management Practices will be utilized to
                                      ensure that the proposed development does not generate impacts that
                                      may affect the health, safety, and welfare of those in the surrounding
                                      area of the proposal.

                    3) The use would not unreasonably burden public agencies to provide roads and
                       streets, sewers, water, drainage, school improvements, and police and fire
                       protection;

                                o     The proposed development will utilize existing roadways and infrastructure
                                      and is not anticipated to place additional burdens on public agencies.

                               o      Water needs for agricultural uses within the project site will be met through
                                      an existing irrigation system operated by the property owner and located


                                                                                                          71Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directofs Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
Marth 10, 2026
                                       within the subject parcel. Potable water will be provided via a private water
                                       system.

                                 o     Fire and police services are located approximately two (2) miles away in
                                       the Town of Waimea. Aside from the standard fire and police protection,
                                       the proposed project is not anticipated to significantly impact these
                                       agencies.

                                 o     The closest schools are Waimea High School and Waimea Canyon
                                       Elementary School. It is not anticipated that this project will significantly
                                       impact these schools.

                        4} Unusual conditions, trends and needs have arisen since the district boundaries and
                           rules were established;

                                o      As stated in the application, the State has recently recognized the need to
                                       promote alternative energy production, including solar energy production.
                                       Such facilities require large tracts of land, which are predominantly located
                                       within the State Land Use Agricultural District. Provided such new uses do
                                       not prevent or adversely impact agricultural uses in the surrounding area,
                                       they are recognized as necessary and permissible in the Agricultural District.

                       5) The land upon which the proposed use is sought is unsuited for the uses permitted
                          within the district.

                                o     As stated in the application, the Applicant will continue to use the project
                                      site for agriculture activities. Although the project site is suitable for
                                      agriculture uses, it is represented that the project site is better suited at this
                                      time for the production of alternative energy production.

                       b.     Would promote the effectiveness and objectives of Chapter 205, HRS, as
                              amended.

                                o     Solar Energy Facilities are recognized as a necessary and reasonable utility
                                      that may be accommodated within the Agricultural District. While the
                                      construction of a new solar energy facility on 'B' rated soils within a project
                                      area exceeding twenty (20) acres is not expressly permitted under the
                                      allowable uses listed in HRS §205-4.5, a Special Permit is being sought to
                                      allow for this use. The permit process provides a mechanism to consider
                                      whether such infrastructure, though not directly agricultural, is compatible
                                      with the overall objectives of Chapter 205.

      3.     General Plan

             Policies to Guide Growth - Section 1.4 of the Kaua'i General Plan (2018):



                                                                                                            SI Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
               Policy #13, entitled "Complete Kauai's shift to Clean Energy," directly supports this
               proposal for a solar energy facility. Policy #13 states:

                "Mitigate climate change and reduce system-wide carbon emissions by at least 80 percent
                by 2050 through deep reductions in energy use and by transforming electricity,
                transportation, and infrastructure systems toward the use of clean energy."

                    o     The proposed solar project is in line with Policy #13, as it will increase the supply of
                          clean energy on Kaua'i by generating renewable electricity. The project will reduce
                          the amount of fossil fuel-based electricity generation, thereby supporting the
                          ongoing objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and transition to clean
                          energy.

       4.    West Kaua'i Community Plan

             The Community Development Plans, which further builds upon the direction set forth in the
             General Plan, also details region-specific policies, objectives, goals, and actions that support
             the provisions detailed in the proposed bill. The proposed development is located within the
             boundaries of the West Kaua'i Community Plan area and is situated on land designated as
             "Agriculture." Policy #1 of the West Kaua'i Community Plan specifies that development
             should be focused in existing towns to protect West Kaua'i's rural qualities and agricultural
             resources. The Policy also specifies:

                "...Agricultural resources in the built environment include the mill sites, many of which are
                vacant or underutilized. Through thoughtful redevelopment and reuse, these former nodes
                of industry can be resurrected as all-purposes activity centers. Furthermore, compact
                design reduces energy consumption and associated greenhouse gas (GHG} emissions, and
                it helps reduce the region's dependence on important energy resources."

                    o While the proposed project site lies outside the Urban boundary, it is important
                      to note that the project supports clean energy production. As such, the
                      development does not conflict with the policy's intent to focus development
                      within existing towns to reduce energy consumption and associated greenhouse
                      gases.

      5. Use Permit

             Pursuant to Article 3 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance (CZO), Chapter 8 of the Kaua'i
             County Code (1987), the purpose of the Use Permit Procedure is to assure the proper
             integration into the community of uses which may be suitable only in specific locations of a
             district, or only under certain conditions, or only if the uses are designed, arranged or
             conducted in a particular manner, and to prohibit the uses if proper integration cannot be
             assured. Section 8-3.2 of the CZO specifies a Use Permit may be granted only if the Planning
             Commission finds that the use:
                   ... is a compatible use and is not detrimental to health, safety, peace, morals, comfort
                   and the general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
                   proposed use, or detrimental or injurious to property
                                                                  - .. �-- - -
                                                                   "   "
                                                                               and improvements
                                                                                             -
                                                                                                in the
                                                                                                       9IPa ge
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR. LLC.
March 10, 2026
                    neighborhood or to the general welfare of the community, and will not cause any
                    substantial harmful environmental consequences on the land of the applicant or on
                    other lands or waters, and will not be inconsistent with the intent of this Chapter and the
                    General Plan.

             In evaluating the project in accordance with the criteria for a Use Permit, the following
             supports the potential compatibility of the proposed use:

                    o      Footprint: In considering the total parcel area of approximately 5,006.74 acres, the
                           proposed project will utilize only a portion of the larger parcel, approximately
                           269.195 acres, thereby minimizing impacts on the agricultural potential of the
                           surrounding lands. Furthermore, in considering the design and layout of the facility,
                           the solar panels will be configured to accommodate continued agricultural activities
                           within the project area, allowing the project to function in conjunction with the
                           overall agricultural use of the parcel.

                    o      Precedent: Similar Use Permits have been approved for solar energy facilities on
                           Agricultural lands in the County, establishing precedent for such uses when
                           appropriately sited and justified.

                    o     Traffic: As documented in the Traffic Impact Analysis Report (TIAR), the proposed
                          development is not expected to result in significant increases in traffic volumes in
                          the surrounding area during either the construction phases or ongoing operations.
                          Furthermore, the construction of the proposed development is not anticipated to
                          preclude the implementation of any potential enhancements to walking, biking,
                          transit, or auto facilities along Kaumuali'i Highway.

                    o     Visual Impacts: As shown in the view study provided in Exhibit U of the application,
                          the proposed development will result in some visual impacts as seen from
                          Kaumuali'i Highway in both directions, as well as from higher vantage points along
                          Waimea Canyon Drive. As represented in the Preliminary Landscape Site Plan dated
                          September 2025, the Applicant proposes to install landscaping along the segment of
                          the project perimeter adjacent to Kaumuali'i Highway to help soften and mitigate
                          visual impacts for motorists and others traveling directly in front of the project area.

                    o     Air Quality/Noise: As represented, during operation, the solar panels will be silent.
                          The inverters and transformers will also be very quiet, emitting less than thirty-eight
                          (38) decibels at 100 meters. During construction activities, air quality and ambient
                          noise levels may be affected at a very minimal level. The Applicant acknowledges
                          and will adhere to the standards of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), as
                          well as the noise and air quality standards of the State of Hawai'i Department of
                          Health.

                    o     Wastewater Treatment and Disposal: The project will utilize an individual
                          wastewater system (IWS) approved by the State of Hawai'i Department of Health.

                                                                                                    10 IP age
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directofs Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                    o      Solid Waste Disposal: Solid waste disposal will be provided by private means. During
                           construction, all waste will be transported by the construction contractor for
                           recycling or disposed of at Kekaha Landfill.

                    o      Biological Resources (Flora): According to the natural resources assessment for the
                           project, a total of 97 plant species were identified, including six indigenous species
                           and three early Polynesian-introduced species; however, none are listed as
                           threatened or endangered under state or federal law.

                    o      Biological Resources (Avian and Mammalian): According to the natural resources
                           assessment for the project, the avian survey recorded 25 bird species, including the
                           endangered Hawaiian duck, and two other indigenous species, the Black-crowned
                           Night Heron and Pacific Golden-Plover. For waterbirds, the assessment determined
                           that no suitable nesting habitats exist on the project site for endemic waterbirds
                           and as a result, the project is not expected to impact listed waterbird species. The
                           assessment also found that all other vertebrates observed are non-native, though
                           the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat may use resources in the area, and the Project
                           will implement measures to avoid or minimize potential impacts to this species.

       6. Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance (CZO) Development Standards

             The proposal is consistent with the development standards contained in the CZO in that:

                    a.    Lot Coverage - Based on the acreage calculations provided in G70 Section 3.3.6
                          (Table 3.1), "Approximate Extent of Project Components," the proposed
                          development complies with the 60% lot coverage requirement set forth in Section
                          8-4.3(d)(3) of the CZO.

                    b. Setbacks - The proposed development complies with the setback requirements for
                       the Agriculture Zoning District. All structures associated with the proposed
                       development are positioned outside the building setback lines.

                    c.    Height - The proposed project complies with the applicable height regulations set
                          forth in Sections 8-1.4 and 8-8.2 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance (CZO).

                              Section 8-l.4(e) specifies:

                                "(e) Nothing in this Chapter shall regulate the placement, design and construction
                                     of the Hawai'i Emergency Management Agency- {HI-EMA) Managed Al/­
                                     Hazard Statewide Outdoor Warning Siren Systems; or utility poles, towers,
                                     and transmission lines by a public utility company as defined in Sec. 269-1,
                                     H.R.S., provided, that the siren systems, poles, and towers shall be no higher
                                     than 20 feet above the height limits for structures applicable in the Use
                                     District in which the poles and towers are constructed."

                              Section 8-8.2(a)(l) specifies:


                                                                                                     11 I Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                                 "(1) The maximum height of any building, other than one intended primarily for
                                       residential use, shall be 50 feet."

                           Under these provisions, utility poles may exceed the standard height limit of the
                           Agriculture District by an additional 20 feet, allowing for a maximum structure
                           height of 70 feet. As represented, the tallest structure associated with the proposed
                           development will be a transmission pole with a height of approximately sixty-five
                           (65) feet. As such, the proposed development remains within the allowable limit.

                    d.     Design/Layout - There are no objections to the overall design of the project, as it is
                           consistent with the functional aspects of operations associated with a solar energy
                           facility. Furthermore, the property is not located within any special design control
                           areas, such as a Form-Based Code or a Special Planning Area.


       7. Native Hawaiian Traditional and Cultural Rights

              A Ka Pa'akai O Ka'aina Analysis was prepared by Cultural Surveys Hawai'i, Inc. (CSH). The
              purpose of this analysis is to: (1) identify valued cultural, historical, and natural resources
              within the proposed project area and the broader ahupua'a of Makaweli, including the
              extent to which traditional and customary Native Hawaiian rights are exercised; (2) evaluate
              the potential impacts of the proposed action on these resources; and {3) identify feasible
              measures, if any, that the Applicant may implement to reasonably protect Native Hawaiian
              rights where they are found to exist.

             To address these objectives, the analysis provides a review of historic and traditional
             accounts associated with the Makaweli ahupua'a, including a summary of place names and
             wahi pana {legendary places). It also provides a summary of archaeological studies that have
             been conducted in the vicinity of the project area as well as a detailed summary of the
             community outreach that was conducted including oral and written testimony of individuals
             that were contacted.

             The consultation outreach involved attempting to contact Hawaiian organizations, agencies,
             and community members as well as cultural and lineal descendants in order to identify
             individuals with cultural expertise and/or knowledge of the project area and vicinity.
             Community outreach letters were sent to 48 individuals or groups; six responded, one
             provided written testimony and three Kama'aina and/or Kupuna met with CSH for more in­
             depth interview.

             Based on the analysis conducted and the historical information available to the Department,
             it has been determined that the proposed development, as situated at its designated
             location, is not anticipated to adversely impact any known Hawaiian traditional or
             customary practices. This determination is supported by the following findings:

                    •     There are no known traditional or customary Native Hawaiian rights or practices
                          currently exercised within the project area.
                    •     There are no documented trails or pathways traversing the project area.
                    •     No known burial sites are located within the project area.
                                                                                                    12 IP age
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                     •     There are no known mo'olelo {oral histories) or wahi pana {storied or sacred places)
                           with a significant direct or indirect connection to the project site.
                     •     The proposed development is not expected to impede access to streams.
                     •     There are no known religious practices currently taking place within the project site.

              It is important to note that, the botanical survey conducted as part of the project's natural
              resources assessment, recorded six indigenous plant species as well as three early
              Polynesian-introduced species within the project area.

              Prior to initiating any ground-disturbing activities, the Applicant should identify and
              implement feasible measures to reasonably protect any indigenous or native plant species,
              or cultural and natural resources within the project area, based on consultation with
              applicable government agencies.

X.       PRELIMINARY CONCLUSION

          Based on the foregoing findings and evaluation, it is concluded that through proper mitigative
          measures and compliance efforts, the proposed development can be considered, and it
          should not have significant adverse impacts to the environment or the surrounding area. The
          proposal is generally in compliance with the criteria outlined for the granting of a Use Permit
          and Class IV Zoning Permit. In addition, the proposed development is consistent with the
          policies outlined in the General Plan, as well as the development standards prescribed by the
          Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.

          It is further concluded that the Special Permit and Use Permit could be considered in that the
          proposed use should promote the overall goals and objectives of Chapter 205, HRS. While the
          proposal does not directly increase agricultural productivity, it is a permissible use under
          Chapter 205, HRS with a Special Permit.

          The Applicant should institute the "Best Management Practices" to ensure that the
          development does not generate impacts that may affect the health, safety, and welfare of
          those in the surrounding area of the proposal.

XI.     PRELMINARY RECOMMENDATION

          Based on the foregoing evaluation and conclusion, it is hereby recommended that Class IV
          Zoning Permit Z-IV-2026-12, Use Permit U-2026-9, and Special Permit SP-2026-4, be
          APPROVED subject to the following conditions:

               1. The project shall be constructed as represented. Any changes to the operation and/or the
                  respective structures shall be reviewed by the Planning Director to determine whether
                  Planning Commission review and approval is warranted.

               2.    Usable lands of the Petition Area, including areas under PV panels, shall be made available
                     for compatible agricultural use at a lease rate that is at least 50 percent below the fair
                     market rent for comparable properties, as long as the Project is in operation. Compatible
                     agricultural operations shall be established by the Applicant and its successors and/or
                                                                                                   13 IP age
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directofs Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                     assigns within 6 months of the start of commercial power generation. Extensions to this
                     deadline may be granted by the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department for
                     unforeseen extenuating circumstances. Additional consideration may be given if the
                     Applicant is actively seeking to have such operations established.

               3. If at any time during the term of the subject permits no compatible agricultural operations
                  exist on the usable lands of the Petition Area for 6 months, the Applicant shall notify the
                  Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department in writing within 30 days of the end
                  of the 6-month period. If requested by the Planning Director, the Applicant shall attend a
                  meeting of the Planning Commission and submit a report to the Planning Commission
                  detailing the Applicant's actual and reasonable efforts to establish compatible agricultural
                  operations on the usable lands of the Petition Area. The Planning Commission may
                  determine whether probable cause exists to re-evaluate the subject permits and to hold a
                  hearing pursuant to the Rules of the Planning Commission. Extensions to the 6-month
                  deadline may be granted by the Planning Director for unforeseen extenuating
                  circumstances.

               4. The Applicant shall submit for review and obtain the approval of the following from the
                  Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department, prior to the issuance of a grading or
                  building permit:

                          a. A survey map accompanied by metes and bounds descriptions of the approved
                             Petition Area.

                          b. A site plan showing the area required under Condition 2, above, relating to the
                             minimum land area to be made available for compatible agricultural use.

               5. Prior to the closing of the building permit for the facility, the Applicant shall submit to the
                  County of Kaua'i Planning Department proof of financial security, such as a letter of credit
                  or similar assurance, from a creditworthy financial institution satisfactory to the County of
                  Kaua'i Planning Department. The security shall remain in place for the duration of the
                  operation of the Project, with evidence of same provided to the Director of the Kaua'i
                  Planning Department on an annual basis, in an amount approved by the County of Kaua'i
                  Planning Department as sufficient to decommission the Project and restore the Petition
                  Area to substantially the same physical condition as existed prior to the development of
                  the facility.

                     The Applicant shall decommission the facility, including the removal of all equipment
                     related to the facility, within twelve (12) months following the termination of operations
                     of the facility. A change in project ownership or change in ownership of the land subject
                     to the Special Permit, which warrants a new proof of financial security to decommission
                     the project, shall be submitted to the County of Kaua'i Planning Department for
                     processing through the Planning Commission, within three (3) months of the ownership
                     change.

                     The Applicant shall incorporate this condition in the license and/or lease agreement with
                     the landowner and said license and/or lease agreement shall be reviewed for approval by
                     the County of Kaua'i Planning Department.
                                                                                                    14 IP age
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directofs Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                 6. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to flora on site as follows:

                           a.     Prior to initiating any ground-disturbing activities, the Applicant should identify
                                  and implement feasible measures to reasonably protect any indigenous or
                                  native plant species, or cultural and natural resources within the project area,
                                  based on consultation with applicable government agencies.

                 7. The Applicant shall mitigate impacts to fauna on site as follows:

                           a.     Applicant shall develop an endangered species awareness training module, which
                                  shall include all potential endangered species that may frequent the Petition Area.

                           b. All construction workers and solar facility employees shall undergo endangered
                              species awareness training prior to starting work.

                           c.    In order to minimize adverse impacts on the Federally Listed Threatened Species,
                                 Newell's Shearwater and other seabirds, external lighting shall be only of the
                                 following types: shielded lights, cut-off luminaries, or indirect lighting. Spotlights
                                 aimed upward or spotlighting of structures, landscaping or the ocean shall be
                                 prohibited.

                          d.      Barbed wire shall not be used on the top of any fencing.

                           e.    Applicant shall monitor avian injuries occurring within the Petition Area, and
                                 report occurrences to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS).

                          f.     The Applicant shall minimize or avoid clearing or grading activities from June 1
                                 through September 15.

                 8. The Applicant shall establish the Project within two (2) years of the date of the Land Use
                    Commission's (LUC) Decision and Order approving the Special Permit. Requests for an
                    extension of this deadline shall be submitted to the Director of the County of Kaua'i
                    Planning Department prior to the expiration of the deadline. The LUC may grant an
                    extension to the deadline to establish the Project due to unforeseen circumstances that
                    were beyond the control of the Applicant. This Special Permit shall be valid for a period
                    of thirty-five (35) years from the date of the LUC's Decision and Order approving the
                    Special Permit, subject to further extensions upon a timely request for extension filed
                    with the Planning Commission at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the
                    Special Permit's expiration. Approval of time extensions shall not be required from the
                    LUC.

                 9.    On or before December 31 of each year that the Special Permit is in effect, the Applicant
                       or its successor shall file an annual report to the LUC, State of Hawai'i Office of Planning,
                       and the County of Kaua'i Planning Department that demonstrates the Applicant's
                       compliance with conditions of the subject permits.




                                                                                                           15 I P a ge
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KAAWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                  10. Major modifications to: (1) the Project plans, including but not limited to significant
                      increases in the number of PV Panels; (2) amendments to the conditions of approval; (3)
                      significant expansions of the approved area; or (4) change in uses stated herein, shall be
                      subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and the LUC. Minor
                      modifications including minor additions to accessory uses and structures, and new
                      incidental uses and structures in the approved area are subject to the review and
                      approval by the Director of the County of Kaua'i Planning Department.

                 11. The Applicant and/or landowner shall notify the Director of the County of Kaua'i
                     Planning Department of:

                           a.     Any change or transfer of licensee on the Petition Area;

                           b.     Any change in uses on the Petition Area;

                           c.     Termination of any uses on the Petition Area; and/or

                           d.     Transfer in ownership of the Petition Area.

                 12. Enforcement of the conditions of the subject permits shall be pursuant to the Rules of
                     the Planning Commission, including the issuance of an order to show cause as to the
                     reason the subject permits should not be revoked if the Planning Commission has reason
                     to believe that there has been a failure to perform the conditions herein.

                 13. If the PV array creates a hazardous condition for pilots or motorists, the facility operator
                     shall immediately mitigate the hazard upon notification by the State of Hawai'i
                     Department of Transportation (DOT) Highways Division, DOT Airports Division, or the
                     Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

                 14. If required to mitigate visual impacts, new landscaping shall be installed and maintained
                     around the Solar Project to screen it when viewed from Kaumuali'i Highway. The County
                     of Kaua'i Planning Department shall determine whether additional landscape screening
                     is necessary and the degree at which it is provided.

                 15. In the event that historic resources, including human skeletal remains, structural
                     remains, cultural deposits, artifacts, sand deposits, or sink holes, are identified during
                     grading and/or construction activities, all work shall cease in the immediate vicinity of
                     the find, the find shall be protected from additional disturbance, and the State Historic
                     Preservation Division (SHPD) and Kaua'i Island Burial Council, as applicable, shall be
                     contacted immediately. Without any limitation to any other condition found herein, if
                     any burials or archaeological or historic sites are discovered during the course of
                     construction of the facility, all construction activity in the vicinity of the discovery shall
                     stop until issuance of an archaeological clearance from the SHPD has been obtained that
                     mitigation measures have been implemented to its satisfaction.

                16. Project construction workers and all other personnel involved in the construction and
                    related activities of the project should be informed of the possibility of inadvertent

                                                                                                     16 I Page
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                       cultural finds, including human skeletal remains. In the event any potential historic
                       properties are identified during construction activities, all activities will cease and the
                       SHPD will be notified pursuant to HAR §13-280-3. In the event iwi kupuna (Native
                       Hawaiian skeletal remains) are identified, all earth moving activities in the area will stop,
                       the area will be cordoned off, and the SHPD and Police Department will be notified
                       pursuant to HAR §13-300-40. In addition, in the event of an inadvertent discovery of
                       human remains, the completion of a burial treatment plan, in compliance with HAR §13-
                       300 and HRS §6E-43, is recommended.

                 17. In the event iwi kupuna and/or cultural finds are encountered during construction,
                     project proponents should consult with cultural and lineal descendants of the area to
                     develop a reinterment plan and cultural preservation plan for proper cultural protocol,
                     curation, and long-term maintenance.

                 18. The Applicant shall resolve and comply with all agency requirements as recommended in
                     the permit application review, including but not limited to the permit requirements for
                     the County DPW-Engineering Division, water requirements for the County Department
                     of Water, and regulations involving environmental concerns as administered by the State
                     Department of Health.

                 19. The Applicant shall develop and utilize Best Management Practices (BM P's) to ensure
                     that the subdivision does not generate impacts that may affect the health, safety, and
                     welfare of those in the surrounding area of the proposal.

                 20. The Applicant shall implement to the extent possible sustainable building techniques
                     and operational methods for the project, such as Leadership in Energy and
                     Environmental Design (L.E.E.D.) standards or another comparable state-approved,
                     nationally recognized, and consensus-based guideline, standard, or system, and
                     strategies, which may include but is not limited to recycling, natural lighting, extensive
                     landscaping, solar panels, low-energy fixtures, low energy lighting and other similar
                     methods and techniques. All such proposals shall be reflected on the plans submitted
                     for building permit review.

                 21. To the extent possible within the confines of union requirements and applicable legal
                     prohibitions against discrimination in employment, the Applicant shall seek to hire
                     Kaua'i contractors as long as they are qualified and reasonably competitive with other
                     contractors, and shall seek to employ residents of Kaua'i in temporary construction
                     and permanent jobs. It is recognized that the Applicant may have to employ non­
                     Kaua'i residents for particular skilled jobs where no qualified Kaua'i resident possesses
                     such skills. For the purposes of this condition, the Commission shall relieve the
                     Applicant of this requirement if the Applicant is subjected to anti-competitive
                     restraints on trade or other monopolistic practices.

                 22. The Applicant is advised that prior to construction and/or use, additional government
                     agency conditions may be imposed. It shall be the Applicant's responsibility to resolve
                     those conditions with the respective agency(ies).


                                                                                                       17 I Pa g e
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KMWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
                23. The Planning Commission reserves the right to revise, modify, add or delete
                    conditions of approval in order to address or mitigate unforeseen impacts this project
                    may create, or revoke the permits through the proper procedures should conditions
                    of approval be violated or adverse impacts be created that cannot be properly
                    addressed.

         The Planning Commission is further advised that this report does not represent the Planning
         Department's final recommendation in view of the forthcoming public hearing process
         scheduled for March 10, 2026, whereby the entire record should be considered prior to
         decision-making. The entire record should include but not be limited to:

                          a. Pending government agency comments;
                          b. Testimony from the general public and interested others; and
                          c. The Applicant's response to the staff's report and recommendation as provided
                             herein.



                                                         B

                                                                  Planner


                                                                                      Commission:




                                                         Date:   _V,_f_r_i/_��-




                                                                                              18 I Pa ge
Z-IV-2026-12, U-2026-9, SP-2026-4; Directo(s Report
KAAWANUI SOLAR, LLC.
March 10, 2026
