                                        SB2658
Measure Title:          RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.
Report Title:           Solar Energy; Agricultural Land
                        Requires that solar facilities on agricultural lands with an overall productivity rating of class B or C occupy up
                        to thirty, rather than ten, per cent of the acreage of the parcel or two or more adjacent parcels having met
                        the applicable county requirements for the joint development or joint lot use of those parcels; provided that
Description:            the area occupied by the solar facilities in excess of twenty acres shall only be made available for agricultural
                        activities compatible with the solar energy facilities at a lease rate that is at least fifty per cent below fair
                        market rent for comparable properties. Requires that solar energy facilities be removed from the land within
                        twelve months when the facilities are no longer in operation. (SD1)
Companion:
Package:                None
Current Referral:       ENE/AGL, WTL
Introducer(s):          GABBARD, CHUN OAKLAND, Galuteria, Ihara


Sort by
                     Status Text
Date

1/17/2014        S   Introduced.

1/21/2014        S   Passed First Reading.

1/21/2014        S   Referred to AGL/ENE, WTL.

1/27/2014        S   Re-Referred to ENE/AGL, WTL.

1/29/2014        S   The committee(s) on ENE/AGL has scheduled a public hearing on 02-06-14 3:30PM in conference room 225.

                     The committee(s) on ENE recommend(s) that the measure be PASSED, WITH AMENDMENTS. The votes in ENE
2/6/2014         S   were as follows: 3 Aye(s): Senator(s) Gabbard, Ruderman, Chun Oakland; Aye(s) with reservations: none ; 0
                     No(es): none; and 2 Excused: Senator(s) Ihara, Slom.

                     The committee(s) on AGL recommend(s) that the measure be PASSED, WITH AMENDMENTS. The votes in AGL
2/6/2014         S   were as follows: 5 Aye(s): Senator(s) Nishihara, Kouchi, Dela Cruz, English, Wakai; Aye(s) with reservations: none
                     ; 0 No(es): none; and 2 Excused: Senator(s) L. Thielen, Slom.

                     Reported from ENE/AGL (Stand. Com. Rep. No. 2217) with recommendation of passage on Second Reading, as
2/12/2014        S
                     amended (SD 1) and referral to WTL.

2/12/2014        S   Report adopted; Passed Second Reading, as amended (SD 1) and referred to WTL.

2/14/2014        S   The committee(s) on WTL has scheduled a public hearing on 02-19-14 1:00PM in conference room 225.
                                                                                                                              DANIEL ORODENKER
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                                                                                                                 Executive Officer
     Governor
                                                                                                                              Bert K. Saruwatari
SHAN S. TSUTSUI                                                                                                                       Planner
Lieutenant Governor                                                                                                     SCOTT A.K. DERRICKSON AICP
                                                                                                                                      Planner
  RICHARD LIM                                                                                                                 RILEY K. HAKODA
     Director                                                                                                                     Chief Clerk
                                                  LAND USE COM M ISSION                                                          FRED A. TALON
MARY ALICE EVANS
                                      Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism                                    Drafting Technician
  Deputy Director
                                                          State of Hawai`i




                                                          Statement of
                                                     Daniel E. Orodenker
                                                       Executive Officer
                                                     Land Use Commission
                                                            Before the
                                              Senate Committee on Water & Land
                                                       February 19, 2014
                                                             1:00 PM
                                              State Capitol, Conference Room 225

                                                       In consideration of
                                                          SB 2658 SD1
                                                  RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

             Chair Solomon, Vice Chair Galuteria and members of the Committee on Water
       and Land;

              The Land Use Commission takes no position with regard to the policy
       considerations raised by this measure. We do, however, offer the following comments
       regarding SB 2658 SD1 that seeks to make utility scale solar energy facilties a
       permissible use within the State Agricultural District on lands classified by the Land
       Study Bureau (LSB) as class B and C.

       We would recommend that the measure be modified to require that solar energy
       facilities proposed for LSB class B or C lands go through the State Special Permit
       process. This process, along with any specific limitations on parcel percentage (%) or
       acreage the Legislature may require, can insure that an open public forum is used to
       balance competing uses on our best agricultural lands and identify the parties
       responsible for implementing and enforcing any conditions of approval.

        We suggest substituting the following for the language contained in SD1 on pages
       2,3,14 and 15 of SD 1 and inserting the following:

       Pages 2 and 3 Lines 9 on page 2 through line 5 on page 3, paragraph numbered 6(B)
       be amended to read:

       (B)          Solar energy facilities placed within land with soil classified as overall productivity
                    rating class B or C shall not occupy more than ten per cent of the acreage of the
                    parcel or twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser, unless a special use permit is

     235 SOUTH BERETANIA STREET  SUITE 406  HONOLULU, HAWAI`I 96813  TEL (808) 587-3822  Fax (808) 587-3827 EMAIL : luc@dbedt.hawaii.gov
                                          Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804
Page 2



         obtained from the Land Use Commission for the facilities pursuant to Section
         205-6 Hawai`i Revised Statutes and, the area occupied by the solar energy
         facilities is also devoted to agricultural activities; provided further that the solar
         energy facilities shall be decommissioned and removed within 12 months of the
         conclusion of operation; and

Page 14 to 15, lines 20 on page 14 through line 16 on page 15, the paragraph
numbered (20) be amended to read:

(20)     Solar energy facilities that have been authorized pursuant to a Land Use
         Commission Special Permit granted pursuant to Section 205-6 Hawai`i Revised
         Statutes and[do not occupy more than ten per cent of the acreage of the parcel,
         or twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser,] provide an area of land for
         agricultural food production that is greater than the area occupied by the solar
         energy equipment, which equipment shall be decommissioned and removed
         within twelve months of the operation; provided further that this use shall not be
         permitted on lands with soil classified by the land study bureau’s detailed land
         classification as overall (master) productivity rating class A; or



         Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this matter.
                                                                                                                            NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                                                         GOVERNOR

                         DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                                                   RICHARD C. LIM
                                                                                                                                          DIRECTOR
                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM                                                                      MARY ALICE EVANS
                                                                                                                                   DEPUTY DIRECTOR

                         No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813   Telephone:    (808) 586-2355
                         Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                       Fax:          (808) 586-2377
                         Web site: www.hawaii.gov/dbedt

                                                   Statement of
                                              RICHARD C. LIM
                                                     Director
                           Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                                    before the
                              SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER AND LAND
                                                   Wednesday, February 19, 2014
                                                               1:00 PM
                                                State Capitol, Conference Room 225
                                                    in consideration of
                                                      SB 2658, SD 1
                                              RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.

                Chair Solomon, Vice Chair Galuteria, and Members of the Committee.
                The Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) supports
         the intent of SB 2658, SD 1, which would permit solar energy facilities on class B or C
         agricultural lands, provided the solar energy facility does not occupy more than 30% of the
         acreage of the parcel(s), and the area occupied by the solar facility is made available for
         compatible agricultural activities at 50% below market lease rate. The measure also requires that
         solar energy facilities be removed within twelve (12) months of the conclusion of the operation.
                Our state Energy Policy seeks to make the best use of Hawaii’s land and resources by
         balancing technical, economic, environmental, and cultural considerations. DBEDT is
         supportive of the advancement of renewable energy development which simultaneously benefits
         and encourages on-site agricultural activities.
                DBEDT supports the mandated decommissioning and removal of solar energy facilities
         within twelve (12) months of the conclusion of the operation.
                We defer to the appropriate agencies regarding whether a State Special Use Permit (SUP)
         should be required prior to placing solar energy facilities on agricultural lands.
                Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments.




SB2658 SD1 SB2658 SD1 _BED_02-19-14_WTL_Approved FinalWTL
                                                                                                                   NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                                                GOVERNOR
              OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                                                        JESSE K. SOUKI
              STATE OF HAWAII                                                                                                    DIRECTOR
                                                                                                                       OFFICE OF PLANNING


              235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813                        Telephone:               (808) 587-2846
              Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                     Fax:               (808) 587-2824
                                                                                                        Web:    http://planning.hawaii.gov/



                                           Statement of
                                       JESSE K. SOUKI
                                   Director, Office of Planning
                                             before the
                          SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER AND LAND
                                  Wednesday, February 19, 2014
                                              1:00 PM
                               State Capitol, Conference Room 225

                                          in consideration of
                                             SB 2658 SD1
                                    RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.


         Chair Solomon, Vice Chair Galuteria, and Members of the Senate Committee on Water
and Land.

         Senate Bill 2658, SD1 amends the State Land Use Law at Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
§§ 205-2 and 205-4.5, to allow “solar energy facilities” within the State Agricultural Land Use
District1 on soils rated by the Land Study Bureau's Overall Productivity Rating (LSB) as “B” and
“C.”2

         HRS § 205-2 currently allows solar energy facilities. However, this amendment would
expand the land coverage of solar energy facilities from 10 percent or 20 acres (whichever is



1
  See HRS § 205-2 (“There shall be four major land use districts in which all lands in the State shall be placed:
urban, rural, agricultural, and conservation.” As of November 12, 2013, approximately 49% of lands in the state are
in the Conservation District and 46% is in the Agricultural District.)
2
  See Land Study Bureau (LSB) Detailed Land Classification, Office of Planning, at
http://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/gis/data/lsb.pdf (The Land Study Bureau of the University of Hawaii prepared an
inventory and evaluation of the State's land resources during the 1960's and 1970's. The Bureau grouped all lands in
the State, except those in the urban district, into homogeneous units of land types; described their condition and
environment; rated the land on its over-all quality in terms of agricultural productivity; appraised its performance for
selected alternative crops; and delineated the various land types and groupings based on soil properties and
productive capabilities. A five-class productivity rating system was developed with “A” representing the class of
highest productivity and “E” the lowest. Ratings were developed for both over-all productivity, and for specific
crops. HRS Chapter 205 uses over-all productivity ratings.).
lesser) to 30 percent of the acreage of the parcel. These statutory provisions would continue to
prohibit solar energy facilities on LSB “A” lands within the State Agricultural District.

          The Hawaii State Plan, passed by the legislature in 1978 and subsequently amended,
promotes both agriculture and the promotion and development of renewable energy for current
and future generations.3 As the Committee balances these complex, often competing policy
objectives, we provide the following comments for your consideration:

         Statewide, LSB soil productivity ratings of lands within the State Agricultural District
          are distributed as follows:
              o 3.1%, LSB “A”
              o 6.2%, LSB “B”
              o 14.9%, LSB “C”
              o 24.9%, LSB “D”
              o 50.9%, LSB “E”
         The counties and the State have not completed the process of identifying important
          agricultural lands (IAL) to the State of Hawaii. The intent of the IAL law is to
          “conser[ve] the State's agricultural land resource base and assur[e] the long-term
          availability of agricultural lands for agricultural use[.]”4 The IAL law, passed in 2005,
          implements Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawaii State Constitution, which directs the
          State to “conserve and protect agricultural lands, promote diversified agriculture, increase
          agricultural self-sufficiency and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands.”
         Allowing non-agricultural uses in the State Agricultural District may contribute to the
          impermanence syndrome, whereby agricultural use declines due to farmers’
          disinvestment in their farm operations in anticipation of development. This has been
          observed to occur where competing uses are allowed in areas designed for agricultural
          uses.5


3
 See HRS §§ 226-7 and 226-18 (relating to the State’s “Objectives and policies for the economy—agriculture” and
“Objectives and policies for facility systems—energy,” respectively).
4
    HRS § 205-41.
5
  Impermanence Syndrome – Have you got it?, Rutgers, at http://njsustainingfarms.rutgers.edu/farmlandissues.html
(last visited, Feb. 3, 2014).

SB2658SD1_BED-OP_02-19-14_WTL                         -2-
       The list of non-agricultural uses on LSB “B” and “C” lands has grown over time.
        Currently, HRS § 205-2 allows the following non-agricultural uses: wind generated
        energy production; biofuel production; limited solar energy facilities; wind machines and
        wind farms; small-scale meteorological, air quality, noise, and other scientific and
        environmental data collection and monitoring facilities; open area recreational facilities;
        and geothermal resources exploration and geothermal resources development. The list of
        non-food related uses is longer still.
       The State Special Permit under HRS § 205-6 grants counties the authority to allow
        “certain unusual and reasonable uses within agricultural and rural districts other than
        those for which the district is classified[.]” In other words, the Special Permit process
        allows uses in the State Agricultural District that are not agricultural uses or related to
        agricultural uses on a case-by-case basis. Although we do not advocate for allowing non-
        agricultural uses within the State Agricultural District, this established process allows
        counties to review non-agricultural uses to mitigate impacts on the State Agricultural
        District. As HRS §§ 205-2 and 205-4.5 are currently drafted, Special Permits are not
        allowed for solar energy facilities on (1) LSB “A” lands, or (2) LSB “B” and “C” lands
        for more than 10 acres or 20 percent of a parcel (whichever is lesser).

        Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure.




SB2658SD1_BED-OP_02-19-14_WTL                    -3-
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                                                                       SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
      Governor                                                                   Chairperson, Board of Agriculture




                                              State of Hawaii
                                     DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                         1428 South King Street
                                       Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512
                                  Phone: (808) 973-9600 FAX: (808) 973-9613




                           TESTIMONY OF SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
                         CHAIRPERSON, BOARD OF AGRICULTURE

                   BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER AND LAND
                            WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 2014
                                       1:00 P.M.
                                      Room 225
                         SENATE BILL NO. 2658, SENATE DRAFT 1
                              RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

   Chairperson Solomon and Members of the Committee:


           Thank you for the opportunity to testify on Senate Bill No. 2658, SD1. The
   Department of Agriculture supports the intent to have solar energy facilities that are
   compatible to agricultural activities and provides comments on this bill.


           According to Office of Planning statistics, about 75 percent of the 1.9 million-acre
   Agricultural District has “D” or “E” ratings. We strongly believe that these poorer-quality
   agricultural lands be considered first for siting solar energy facilities. As we stated
   earlier, existing State law does not impose limits on the acreage of “D” and “E” rated
   lands that can be used for solar energy facilities. On the other hand, “B” and “C” rated
   agricultural lands comprise 21 percent of Hawaii’s agricultural lands, have fair to good
   capacity for intensive agricultural production, and are more likely to be considered and
   designated as Important Agricultural Lands.


           Thank you for the opportunity to present our testimony.
                          SENATE COMMITTEE ON WATER AND LAND
                                   February 19, 2014, 1 P.M.
                                          Room 225
                                 (Testimony is 3 pages long)

                           TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 2658 SD1



Chair Solomon, Vice Chair Galuteria, and members of the Committee on Water and Land:


The Blue Planet Foundation supports SB 2658, allowing the dual use of solar energy generation
with farming or ranching on agricultural lands with Land Study Bureau ratings of B & C. We
believe passage of this measure will enable greater amounts of low-cost, clean, indigenous
energy to power our islands while preserving and expanding the opportunity to provide local
food and other agricultural products.



This	  policy	  is	  timely	  and	  necessary	  to	  expand	  the	  amount	  of	  affordable	  
renewable	  energy	  

Solar energy is currently a bright spot in Hawaii’s progress toward energy independence, with
increasing amounts of affordable renewable solar powering our lifestyles and economy. The
cost of solar energy equipment has dropped some 50% over the past four years, making it more
affordable than oil-fired electricity generation. In fact, in responses to an invitation from Hawaiian
Electric Company last year for utility scale renewable projects fitting certain criteria, the
proposed electricity prices from projects (which were mostly solar) averaged 15.8 cents per
kilowatt-hour—far below the 23 to 25 cents per kilowatt-hour for oil-fired generation. These
proposed photovoltaic farms—the others that are currently in operation—provide the lowest cost
solar energy, and those savings are shared with all ratepayers. Further, when we shift our
energy dollars away from foreign oil and to local clean energy sources, those dollars circulate in
Hawai‘i's economy to the benefit of everyone.

Solar energy has widespread support and is typically easier to site than other forms of
renewable energy, such as wind and geothermal. A recent poll of Hawai‘i residents conducted
by the Pacific Resource Partnership found that solar has broad acceptance and support, with


                                      info@blueplanetfoundation.org
    55 Merchant Street 17th Floor • Honolulu, Hawai‘I 96813 • 808-954-6142 • blueplanetfoundation.org
96% of respondents in favor of solar. On O‘ahu in particular, much of the available land is more
suitable for solar energy than wind. Solar energy’s low profile, silent operation, and lack of
significant moving parts make it less likely to encounter community resistance than other clean
energy sources.

The timing of SB 2658 is critical to provide the opportunity for projects to come online that will
make use of the existing 30% federal tax credit for solar—further lowering costs to ratepayers.
This 30% federal credit expires at the end of 2016 and it is unlikely to be renewed. This
measure will help clear the path for some projects to be built before the credit’s expiration,
saving ratepayers hundreds of millions over the life of the project. Allowing solar projects to
proceed on class B & C lands without having to obtain a special use permit will help to enable
timely construction so ratepayers can enjoy the benefits of low-cost renewable energy.



This	  policy	  is	  limited	  in	  scope	  and	  contains	  provisions	  to	  protect—and	  
increase—farming	  

This measure contains a number of provisions to protect the long-term value and possible uses
of farmland.

First, the measure requires that the land be made available for concurrent agricultural activities.
This dual use of the agricultural lands—which may include the growing of some crops or grazing
of livestock—provides double value from land that is likely currently unused. Further, energy
generation can improve the viability of land for agriculture by providing infrastructure and
subsidizing land costs for complementary agricultural uses, particularly through the requirement
in SD1 that land be made available for agriculture at a lease rate that is 50% or less of the
market value. Revenue from the solar operations can help make farming operations pencil out
for the entire agricultural operation, benefitting agriculture for our state.

Second, SB 2658 requires that the solar facilities be removed at the end of their operation.
Specifically, “the solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned and removed within twelve
months of the conclusion of operation….” This ensures that the farmland can be later used for
other agricultural purposes at the end of the solar facilities operations. Since solar farms have a
relatively small footprint (when compared to housing or industrial development), the use of the
land for a solar farm is really a form of land banking where the land is essentially protected for
later use.

Third, this policy enables solar projects (with co-existing ag operations) to proceed without
seeking a change in zoning. The land remains as agriculture and will remain similarly protected
at the end of the solar facilities operations.


Blue Planet Foundation                                                                         Page 2
Finally, SB 2658 only relates to agricultural lands with LSB classifications of B & C—it does not
include class A lands, the most productive and valuable farmlands.

Blue Planet believes that SB 2658 is an appropriate approach to support both energy and food
sustainability. The legislature previously found that allowing solar energy facilities within the
agricultural district furthers and is consistent with the purposes, standards, and criteria of uses
within agricultural lands, and that renewable energy facilities increase both the State's energy
self-sufficiency and food security. Many of the LSB class B & C agricultural lands currently are
not being farmed. Because of the requirements in this measure, SB 2658 will likely increase the
acreage of ag lands that are actively being farmed or ranched, while providing timely access to
harvest the low-cost, indigenous, renewable solar energy to power our islands.

Mahalo for the opportunity to testify.




Blue Planet Foundation                                                                      Page 3
From:                  Luann Casey
To:                    WTLTestimony
Subject:               *****SPAM***** In Support of Senate Bill 2658 SD1
Date:                  Monday, February 17, 2014 6:34:14 PM


Senator Malama Solomon, Senate Committee on Water and Land
Senate Committee on Water and Land
Hawaii State Legislature
State Capitol
415 S. Beretania Street
Honolulu, HI 96813

TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SENATE BILL 2658 SD1 – RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Dear Chair Solomon and members of the Senate Committee on Water and Land,

We own and operate Tin Roof Ranch, an environmentally-friendly, organic, and sustainable farm located on the North Shore of Oahu in
beautiful Haleiwa.
Tin Roof Ranch produces organic, free range chickens and eggs and other organic produce for purchase at local farmers’ market.

We also raise sheep and lambs that we sell to local butchers, stores and restaurants. Demand for lamb and sheep products is so high we
cannot keep up with
the requests and many times we have to turn down offers to buy our lamb and sheep products.

We support S.B. 2658 SD1 because it will provide an incentive for large agricultural landowners to open up more land on Oahu for sheep
 farming. The solar
energy operation could also help to subsidize segments of the sheep farming operation including lease rent, fencing and water production
making farming
more cost-effective for the farmer.

Sheep farming needs large tracts of land to be successful because sheep forage in herds within blocks of pasture and then are moved
through cross fencing to
other sections of the land to allow for regrowth of grass.

Because we pride ourselves on running a farm that utilizes sustainable practices, we also like the idea that our sheep operations would
coexist with renewable
energy and our sheep could help with grass maintenance for the solar panels.

We respectfully request that you approve S.B. 2658 SD1 as a show of support for renewable energy and sheep farming.

Aloha,
Luann Casey and Gary Gunder
Tin Roof Ranch
Haleiwa, Hawaii
