NEIL ABERCROMBIE                              ,5;-7'; ~ Q 5 §;;*~t€,/                  SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
    Governor                                                                     Chairperson, Board of Agriculture
                                                     , ,‘
                                                   ﬁg“
                                                  ~21 g,-Q                             KEN H. KAKESAKO
                                             PE}                    S-;~
                                                                   \-
                                                                                    Deputy to the Chairperson

                                                 State of Hawaii
                                     DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                           1428 South King Street
                                        Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512
                                  Phone: (808)973-9600 FAX: (808)973-9613




                           TESTIMONY OF SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
                         CHAIRPERSON, BOARD OF AGRICULTURE

                   BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
                            THURSDAY, MARCH 13, 2014
                                    9:30 A.M.
                                    Room 312
                          SENATE BILL NO. 2658, SENATE DRAFT 3
                                RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

   Chairperson Wooley and Members of the Committee:


           Thank you for the opportunity to testify on Senate Bill No. 2658, Senate Draft 3.
   The Department of Agriculture supports the concept of solar energy facilities that are
   coexistent with agricultural activities and provides comments on this bill.


           According to Office of Planning statistics, about 75 percent of the 1.9 million-acre
   Agricultural District has “D” or “E” ratings. We strongly believe that these poorer-quality
   agricultural lands be considered first for siting solar energy facilities. As we stated
   earlier, existing State law does not impose limits on the acreage of “D“ and “E” rated
   lands that can be used for solar energy facilities. On the other hand, “B” and “C” rated
   agricultural lands comprise 21 percent of Hawaii’s agricultural lands, have fair to good
   capacity for intensive agricultural production, and are more likely to be considered and
   designated as Important Agricultural Lands.

           Thank you for the opportunity to present our testimony.
         , ~‘ O ;-”‘<>.»
                     *1»
V,’ >,       \9 5 9 ';'-.3,                                                                                                     NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                                                                        °”‘
  T9; A ="=_                            OFFICE OF PLANNING
    3'      -= =,>,:'_     "-_»                                                                                                                GOVERN
                                                                                                                                     JESSE K. SOUKI
                         3*.                            0F                     I                                                    OFFICE or Eéiiaiivclvisg

                           '            235 South Beretania Street, em Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813            Telephone:              (808) 587.2846
                                        Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                        Fax:              (808) 58712824
                                                                                                                     Web:    http://planning.hawa||.gov/



                                                                  Statement of the
                                                              OFFICE OF PLANNING
                                                                     before the
                                                       HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

                                                                    Thursday, March 13, 2014
                                                                              9:30 AM
                                                               State Capitol, Conference Room 312

                                                                           in consideration of
                                                                              SB 2658 SD3
                                                              RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.



                                  Chair Wooley, Vice Chair Onishi, and Members of the House Committee on Agriculture.

                                  The Office of Planning respectfully offers the following comments on Senate Bill 2658,
                SD 3, which amends the State Land Use Law at Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 205-2 and
               205-4.5, to allow “solar energy facilities” within the State Agricultural Land Use District on soils
               rated by the Land Study Bureau’s (LSB) Overall Productivity Rating as “B” and “C.”
                                  HRS § 205-2 and HRS § 205-4.5 currently allow solar energy facilities in the State
               Agricultural District, with certain restrictions. This bill would do the following:
                                  (1)      expand the land coverage of solar energy facilities from ten percent of the acreage
                                           of the parcel or twenty acres of land, whichever is less, to thirty percent of the
                                           acreage of the parcel or twenty acres of land, whichever is less;
                                  (2)      require that a Special Use Permit be granted for the facility pursuant to HRS
                                            § 205-6;
                                  (3)      allow for development of a solar energy facility on multiple adjacent parcels
                                           through joint development or joint lot use; and
                                  (4)      require that the area occupied by the solar energy facility be made available for
                                           compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least ﬁfty percent below
                                           fair market rent for comparable properties.
        The statutory provisions would continue to prohibit solar energy facilities on LSB “A”
lands within the State Agricultural District.
        The Hawaii State Plan, passed by the legislature in 1978 and subsequently amended,
promotes both agriculture and the development of renewable energy for current and future
generations. As the Committee balances these complex and often competing policy objectives,
we provide the following comments for your consideration:

    1. Statewide, LSBs soil productivity ratings of lands within the State Agricultural District
        are distributed as follows:
            a. 3.1%, LSB “A”
            b. 6.2%, LSB “B”
            c.   14.9%, LSB “C”
            d. 24.9%, LSB “D”
            e. 50.9%, LSB
    2. The counties and the State have not completed the process of identifying important
        agricultural lands (IAL) to the State of Hawaii. The intent of the IAL law is to
        “conser[ve] the State’s agricultural land resource base and assur[e] the long-term
        availability of agricultural lands for agricultural use[.]” The IAL law, passed in 2005,
        implements Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawaii State Constitution, which directs the
        State to “conserve and protect agricultural lands, promote diversiﬁed agriculture, increase
        agricultural self-sufficiency and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands.”
    3. Allowing non-agricultural uses in the State Agricultural District may contribute to the
        impermanence syndrome, whereby agricultural uses decline due to farmers’
        disinvestment in their farm operations in anticipation of development. This has been
        observed to occur where competing uses are allowed in areas designed for agricultural
        uses.
    4. The list of non-agricultural uses on class B or C agricultural lands has grown over time.
        Currently, HRS § 205-2 allows the following non-agricultural uses: wind generated
        energy production; biofuel production; limited solar energy facilities; wind machines and
        wind fanns; small-scale meteorological, air quality, noise, and other scientiﬁc and
        environmental data collection and monitoring facilities; open area recreational facilities;



SB2658SD3_BED-OP_3-13-l4_AGR                     -2-
        and geothermal resources exploration and geothermal resources development. The list of
        non-food related uses is longer still.
    5. As currently worded, the allowance ofjoint development or joint lot use for solar energy
        facilities in the proposed amendments to HRS § 205-2 and HRS § 205-4.5 would remove
        all restrictions to the amount of acreage that may be used by solar energy facilities.
    6. This amendment requires the area occupied by solar energy facilities be made available
        for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least ﬁfty percent below fair
        market rent for comparable properties. Clarity on what “compatible agricultural
        activities” and “comparable properties” constitute would be beneﬁcial for appropriate
        interpretation of the provision.


        Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure.




SB2658SD3_BED-OP_3-13-l4_AGR                      -3-
                                                                                                                                                          REVISED

                    ,/"""-*4-_
                      or       -.
                                                                                                                                                  NEIL ABERCROMBIE
          ' 4
                                                                                                                                                               GOVERNOR
                                    __
          *‘T-"3, ‘.9 1
         Q '
                          5 9 .§"-."         DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                                                    RICHARD c. |.||v|
    *"
                    a                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM
                                     1

        :                                                                                                                                         MARY ALICE EVANS
     ll‘: Q:
     (    “'$‘ ,’                                                                                                                                       DEPUTY DIRECTOR
—>,g=.;"-5;
    ‘
            § K              W        11
                                        'v
      '<.'~          //g         __.".‘
                                   Q         No. 1 Capitol DlSl|'lCl Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813   Telephone:    (808)586-2355
     Kg?»
                            M.--",\~*‘       Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                        Fax:          (sos) 58672377
                                             Web Sllel www.hawaii.gov/dbedt
                                                                       Statement of
                                                                   RICHARD C. LIM
                                                                        Director
                                               Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                                                        before the
                                                          HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
                                                                             Thursday, March 13, 2014
                                                                                  9:30 a.m.
                                                                    State Capitol, Conference Room 312
                                                                                   in consideration of
                                                                                     SB 2658, SD 3
                                                                   RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.

                                 Chair Wooley, Vice Chair Onishi, and Members of the Committee.
                                 The Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) supports
                    the intent of SB 2658, SD 3, which Would permit solar energy facilities on class B or C
                    agricultural lands in excess of 30% of the parcel acreage or 20 acres, whichever is lesser, or in
                    the alternative, at least two parcels having met joint development/lot use; provided that, a special
                    use permit is obtained and the area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made available
                    for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate 50% below market value. The measure also
                    requires that solar energy facilities be removed Within twelve (12) months of the conclusion of
                    the operation.
                                 Our state Energy Policy seeks to make the best use of l-lawaii’s land and resources by
                    balancing technical, economic, environmental, and cultural considerations. DBEDT supports the
                    advancement of renewable energy development that beneﬁts and encourages on-site agricultural
                    activities, and the mandated removal of such development at the end of its operational lifetime.
                                 We suppoﬂ the Land Use Commission’s recommendation that a State Special Use Permit
                    (SUP) should be required prior to placing solar energy facilities on agricultural lands in excess of
                    the allowed limits. We also support the Ofﬁce of Planning’s comments on the need to balance
                    the complex and often competing policy objectives promoting both agriculture and renewable
                    energy for current and future generations.
                                 Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments.



                    sszsss spa sszsss s03 _BED_03-13-l4_AGR_Approved Final_revAGR
                                                                                                                                         DANIEL ORODENKER
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                                                                                                                            Executive Officer
     Governor                                                                             "
                                                                              //4,~/"5;     in».1,3.
                                                                                  ‘ﬂu,-.-.'Z§                                            Bert K. Saruwatari
 SHAN S. Tsursui                                                                   Y»:~95»
                                                                                                                                                 Planner
Lieutenant Govemor                                                                                                                 Scorr A.K. DERRICKSON AICP
                                                                                                                                                 Planner
  RICHARD LIM
     Director
                                                                              -.
                                                                                     %lP;1Z"~J”
                                                                                    , »-...        ti                                    RILEY K. HAKODA
                                                                                                                                             ChiefClerk
                                                  LAND USE COMMISSION                                                                       FRED A. TALON
MARY A|.|cE EVANS                         Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism
  Deputy Director                                                                                                                          Drafting Technician
                                                                            State of Hawai‘i




                                                                 Statement of
                                                            Daniel E. Orodenker
                                                              Executive Officer
                                                            Land Use Commission
                                                                   Before the
                                                      House Committee on Agriculture
                                                                March 13, 2014
                                                                    9:30 AM
                                                     State Capitol, Conference Room 312

                                                              In consideration of
                                                                 SB 2658 SD3
                                                        RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

                    Chair Wooley, Vice Chair Onishi and members of the Committee on Agriculture;

             The Land Use Commission takes no position with regard to the policy
       considerations raised by this measure. We do, however, offer the following comments
       regarding SB 2658 SD3 that seeks to make utility scale solar energy facilties a
       permissible use within the State Agricultural District on lands classified by the Land
       Study Bureau (LSB) as class B and C.

       We strongly recommend that any reference to the County joint development process be
       removed. This language is unclear in its purpose, unnecessary in its inclusion and
       renders the application of section 205-2(d)(6)(B) impossible. It is also clearly
       inappropriate for any state agency or commission to determine whether a proposed
       development meets county standards or requirements.

       We recommend amending the currently proposed language in 205-2(6)(B) on pages 2
       and 3, to read:

                    (B)        Solar energy facilities placed within land with soil classified as overall
                    productivity rating class B or C shall not occupy more than ten_per cent of the
                    acreage of the parcel or twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser, unless a
                    special use permit has been qranted from the Land Use Commission pursuant to
                    section 205-6IJ)l’OVld€Cl that the area occupied bv the solar enerqy facilities is
                    also made available for compatible aqricultural activities at a lease rate that is at
                    least fift\Lpercent below the fair market rent for comparable properties; provided
                    further that the solar enerqy facilities shall be decommissioned and removed

     Z35 SUUIH B|:Rl:| \\M S|Rl:|:l Q SUili:406 9 HO)\Ol_lJl.lJ, HAW/\l'l    96813 9 TEL (808) 5875822 9 Fax (808) 587—3827Q EMAIL; luc@dbedt.hawaii.gov
                                               Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804
       within 12 months of the conclusion of operation. For the purposes of this
       subparaqgph, compatible “agricultural activities" means the activities described
       in paragraphs (1 ) to (3);

We recommend amending the currently proposed language in 205-4.5 (a)(20) on pages
15 to 16, to read:

       (20) Solar energy facilities that do not occupy more than ten per cent of the
       acreage of the parcel, or twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser; or that have
       been authorized pursuant to a Land Use Commission Special Permit qranted
       pursuant to section 205-6; provided that the area occupied by the solar enerqy
       facilities is also made available for compatible agricultural activities at a lease
       rate that is at least fift\g)ercent below the fair market rent for comparable
       properties, and provided further that the solar energy facilities shall be
       decommissioned and removed within twelve months of the conclusion of the
       operation. This use shall not be permitted on lands with soil classified by the
       land study bureau's detailed land classification as overall (master) productivity
       rating class A; or

       Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this matter.
                                        $1
Directors                            TESTIMONY OF WARREN BOLLMEIER ON BEHALF OF THE
Jody Allione
                                      HAWAII RENEWABLE ENERGY ALLIANCE BEFORE THE
Silver Ridge                                 HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
Joe Boivin                                   SB 2203 SD3, RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY
Hawaii Gas
                                                               March 13, 2014
Kelly King
Pacific Biodiesel
                         Chair Wooley, Vice-Chair Onishi and members of the Committee, I am Warren
Warren S. Bollmeier ll   Bollmeier, testifying on behalf of the Hawaii Renewable Energy Alliance (“HREA”).
WSB»Hawaii               HREA is an industry-based, nonprofit corporation in Hawaii established in 1995. Our
                         mission is to support, through education and advocacy, the use of renewables for a
                         sustainable, energy-efficient, environmentally-friendly, economically- sound future for
                         Hawaii. One of our goals is to support appropriate policy changes in state and local
                         government, the Public Utilities Commission and the electric utilities to encourage
                         increased use of renewables in Hawaii.

                         The purposes of SB 2203 SD3 are to: (i) require a special use permit for solar energy
                         facilities on class B or C land, (ii) require solar energy facilities placed within land with
                         soil classified as overall productivity rating class B or C to occupy not more than thirty
                         per cent of the acreage of the parcel, or twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser, or in
                         the alternative, of two or more adjacent parcels having met the applicable county
                         requirements for the joint development or joint lot use of those parcels, (iii) require the
                         area occupied by the solar energy facility to also be made available for compatible
                         agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty per cent below fair market rent
                         for comparable properties, (iv) require the area occupied by the solar energy facility to
                         also be made available for compatible agricultural activities, (v) define "agricultural
                         activities", (vi) require that solar energy facilities be decommissioned and removed
                         within twelve months of the conclusion of operation.

                         HREA supports this measure with the following comments and recommendations:

                             1) Comments. The intent of the measure clear, as the measure:

                                 a) would promote the concept of dual use of Class B & C agricultural lands
                                    for agricultural activities and solar energy facilities.

                                 b) represents a creative approach to making the best use of available
                                    resources to meet Hawaii’s clean energy goals and support a strong
                                    agricultural industry, i.e., this is at the heart of increasing both our Food
                                    and Energy Security.

                                 c) does not propose a permanent use of the land for solar, e.g., this
                                     measure requires the removal of the solar energy facilities at the
                                     conclusion of operation and restoration of the site to its pre-solar facility
                                     condition.
                             2) Recommendations: We recommend that you pass this measure out.

                         Mahalo for this opportunity to testify.
46-040 Konane Place #3816, Kaneohe HI 9674-4 v www.http://hawaiirenewableenergyprg v p: 808.247.7753 - wsb@lava net
46-040 Konane Place #3816, Kaneohe HI 96744 v www.http://hawaiirenewableenergyprg - p: 808.247.7753 - wSb@lava.net
                                                                                                         R
                                                                                       ‘xllllunk            lli



                                             TESTIMONY OF
                         CRYSTAL KUA, DIRECTOR OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS — HAWAl’l
                                       FIRST WIND SOLAR GROUP
                                              BEFORE THE
                                  HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

                     TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF S.B. Z658 SD3 WITH AMENDMENTS

Aloha Chair Wooley, Vice Chair Onishi and members of the House Committee on Agriculture,

Mahalo for this opportunity to provide testimony in support of S.B. 2658 SD3 with amendments.

This bill allows for utility-scale solar projects on B- and C-rated agricultural land larger than 20 acres ll‘
the project also makes the land available for compatible agricultural activity.

This dual use ofthe land is a win for renewable energy, a win for local agriculture, and a win for Hawai'i
residents for the following reasons:
    0 The solar project could help provide affordable pasture land and infrastructure (e.g. fencing and
        roads) for the farmer or rancher, lowering costs and helping to promote local agribusiness.
    1 Sheep grazing could provide a sustainable way to manage vegetation, keeping the grass and
        weeds from shading the solar panels; and
    0 The combined use could provide local residents with both lower-cost clean energy and locally-
        raised agricultural products.

We are requesting an HD1 with the attached amendments. These amendments assure a benefit to
agriculture with the availability of lease rent at least 50% below market value and also provide a process
to ensure transparency and accountability. These amendments also reflect the assistance we received
throughout the legislative session from the Land Use Commission and the Sierra Club toward the
proposed HD1.

For all these reasons, we respectfully request that the committee approve S.B. 2658 SD3 with the
proposed amendments.

Mahalo.
THE SENATE                                           2658
TWENTY-SEVENTH                         S ' B ' N O ' so 3
LEGISLATURE, 2014                                    H.D. 1
STATE OF HAWAII




                  A BILL FOR AN ACT
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.



BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:


SECTION l.    The purpose of this Act is to enable the complementary

uses of utility scale solar energy generation and local food

production on agricultural land with an overall productivity rating of

class B or C.

     SECTION 2.       Section 205-2,   Hawaii Revised Statutes,    is amended by

amending subsection      (d)   to read as follows:

     "(d)    Agricultural districts shall include:

      (1)    Activities or uses as characterized by the cultivation

             of crops,     crops for bioenergy,      orchards,    forage,   and

             forestry;

      (2)    Farming activities or uses related to animal husbandry

             and game and fish propagation;

      (3)    Aquaculture, which means the production of aquatic

             plant and animal life within ponds and other bodies of

             water;
(4)   Wind generated energy production for public, private,

      and commercial use;

(5)   Biofuel production,      as described in section

      205—4.5(a)(l6),      for public, private,   and commercial

      use;

(6)   Solar energy facilities; provided that:

      (A)    This paragraph shall apply only to land with soil

             classified by the land study bureau's detailed

             land classification as overall       (master)

             productivity rating class B, C, D, or E; and

      (B)    Solar energy facilities placed within land with

             soil classified as overall productivity rating

             class B or C shall not occupy more than ten per

             cent of the acreage of the parcel, or twenty

             acres of land, whichever is lesser[+], unless a

             special use permit has been granted pursuant to

             section 205-6; provided that the area occupied by

             the solar energy facilities is also made

             available for compatible agricultural activities

             at a lease rate that is at least fifty per cent

             below the fair market rent for comparable

             properties.     For the purposes of this

             subparagraph,    "agricultural activities" means the

             activities described in paragraphs (l) to (3);
     and provided further that the solar energy

     facilities shall be decommissioned and removed

     within twelve months of the conclusion of

     operation;

Bona fide agricultural services and uses that support

the agricultural activities of the fee or leasehold

owner of the property and accessory to any of the

above activities, regardless of whether conducted on

the same premises as the agricultural activities to

which they are accessory, including farm dwellings as

defined in section 205—4.5(a)(4),   employee housing,

farm buildings, mills, storage facilities, processing

facilities, photovoltaic, biogas,   and other small-

scale renewable energy systems producing energy solely

for use in the agricultural activities of the fee or

leasehold owner of the property, agricultural—energy

facilities as defined in section 205—4.5(a)(l7),

vehicle and equipment storage areas,   and plantation

community subdivisions as defined in section

205—4.5(a)(l2);

Wind machines and wind farms;

Small—scale meteorological, air quality, noise, and

other scientific and environmental data collection and

monitoring facilities occupying less than one—half
      acre of land; provided that these facilities shall not

      be used as or equipped for use as living quarters or

      dwellings;

10)   Agricultural parks;

ll)   Agricultural tourism conducted on a working farm, or a

      farming operation as defined in section 165-2, for the

      enjoyment,   education,   or involvement of visitors;

      provided that the agricultural tourism activity is

      accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural

      use and does not interfere with surrounding farm

      operations; and provided further that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that has adopted

      ordinances regulating agricultural tourism under

      section 205-5;

12)   Agricultural tourism activities,     including overnight

      accommodations of twenty—one days or less, for any one

      stay within a county; provided that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that includes at least

      three islands and has adopted ordinances regulating

      agricultural tourism activities pursuant to section

      205-5; provided further that the agricultural tourism

      activities coexist with a bona fide agricultural

      activity.    For the purposes of this paragraph,   "bona
           fide agricultural activity" means a farming operation

          as defined in section 165-2;

   (13)   Open area recreational facilities;

[+](l4)[+]Geothermal resources exploration and geothermal

          resources development,      as defined under section 182-1;

          and

[+1(15)[+]Agricultural-based commercial operations,         including:

          (A)   A roadside stand that is not an enclosed

                 structure,    owned and operated by a producer for

                 the display and sale of agricultural products

                 grown in Hawaii and value-added products that

                 were produced using agricultural products grown

                 in Hawaii;

          (B)   Retail activities in an enclosed structure owned

                 and operated by a producer for the display and

                 sale of agricultural products grown in Hawaii,

                 value-added products that were produced using

                 agricultural products grown in Hawaii,       logo items

                 related to the producer's agricultural

                 operations,    and other food items; and

          (C)   A retail food establishment owned and operated by

                 a producer and permitted under [+]title ll,[+]

                 chapter 12 of the rules of the department of

                 health that prepares and serves food at retail
                          using products grown in Hawaii and value-added

                          products that were produced using agricultural

                          products grown in Hawaii.

                 The owner of an agricultural-based commercial

                 operation shall certify, upon request of an officer or

                 agent charged with enforcement of this chapter under

                 section 205-12,       that the agricultural products

                 displayed or sold by the operation meet the

                 requirements of this paragraph.

Agricultural districts shall not include golf courses and golf driving

ranges,    except as provided in section 205-4.5(d).              Agricultural

districts include areas that are not used for,              or that are not suited

to, agricultural and ancillary activities by reason of topography,

soils,    and other related characteristics."

     SECTION 3.           Section 205—4.5,   Hawaii Revised Statutes,     is amended

by amending subsection          (a)   to read as follows:

     "(a)        Within the agricultural district,       all lands with soil

classified by the land study bureau's detailed land classification as

overall        (master)   productivity rating class A or B shall be restricted

to the following permitted uses:

         (1)     Cultivation of crops,        including crops for bioenergy,

                 flowers, vegetables,        foliage,   fruits,    forage,   and

                 timber;

         (2)     Game and fish propagation;
Raising of livestock,    including poultry, bees,      fish,

or other animal or aquatic life that are propagated

for economic or personal use;

Farm dwellings,    employee housing,    farm buildings,   or

activities or uses related to farming and animal

husbandry.     "Farm dwelling", as used in this

paragraph, means a single-family dwelling located on

and used in connection with a farm, including clusters

of single-family farm dwellings permitted within

agricultural parks developed by the State, or where

agricultural activity provides income to the family

occupying the dwelling;

Public institutions and buildings that are necessary

for agricultural practices;

Public and private open area types of recreational

uses, including day camps, picnic grounds, parks, and

riding stables, but not including dragstrips,

airports,    drive-in theaters,   golf courses, golf

driving ranges,    country clubs,    and overnight camps;

Public, private,    and quasi-public utility lines and

roadways,    transformer stations,    communications

equipment buildings, solid waste transfer stations,

major water storage tanks,    and appurtenant small

buildings such as booster pumping stations, but not
      including offices or yards for equipment, material,

      vehicle storage,    repair or maintenance,     treatment

      plants,   corporation yards,    or other similar

      structures;

(8)   Retention,    restoration,   rehabilitation,   or improvement

      of buildings or sites of historic or scenic interest;

(9)   Agricultural-based commercial operations as described

      in section    [+1205-2(d)(l5)[+];

10)   Buildings and uses,    including mills,   storage,   and

      processing facilities, maintenance facilities,

      photovoltaic, biogas,    and other small—scale renewable

      energy systems producing energy solely for use in the

      agricultural activities of the fee or leasehold owner

      of the property, and vehicle and equipment storage

      areas that are normally considered directly accessory

      to the above—mentioned uses and are permitted under

      section 205-2(d);

ll    Agricultural parks;

12    Plantation community subdivisions, which as used in

      this chapter means an established subdivision or

      cluster of employee housing,      community buildings, and

      agricultural support buildings on land currently or

      formerly owned,    leased,   or operated by a sugar or

      pineapple plantation; provided that the existing
      structures may be used or rehabilitated for use,      and

      new employee housing and agricultural support

      buildings may be allowed on land within the

      subdivision as follows:

      (A)   The employee housing is occupied by employees or

             former employees of the plantation who have a

            property interest in the land;

      (B)   The employee housing units not owned by their

             occupants shall be rented or leased at affordable

             rates for agricultural workers; or

      (C)   The agricultural support buildings shall be rented

             or leased to agricultural business operators or

             agricultural support services;

13)   Agricultural tourism conducted on a working farm, or a

      farming operation as defined in section 165-2,   for the

      enjoyment, education, or involvement of visitors;

      provided that the agricultural tourism activity is

      accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural

      use and does not interfere with surrounding farm

      operations; and provided further that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that has adopted

      ordinances regulating agricultural tourism under

      section 205-5;
14    Agricultural tourism activities,   including overnight

      accommodations of twenty-one days or less,   for any one

      stay within a county; provided that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that includes at least

      three islands and has adopted ordinances regulating

      agricultural tourism activities pursuant to section

      205-5; provided further that the agricultural tourism

      activities coexist with a bona fide agricultural

      activity.   For the purposes of this paragraph,   "bona

      fide agricultural activity" means a farming operation

      as defined in section 165-2;

15)   Wind energy facilities, including the appurtenances

      associated with the production and transmission of

      wind generated energy; provided that the wind energy

      facilities and appurtenances are compatible with

      agriculture uses and cause minimal adverse impact on

      agricultural land;

16    Biofuel processing facilities,   including the

      appurtenances associated with the production and

      refining of biofuels that is normally considered

      directly accessory and secondary to the growing of the

      energy feedstock; provided that biofuel processing

      facilities and appurtenances do not adversely impact
      agricultural land and other agricultural uses in the

      vicinity.

          For the purposes of this paragraph:

          "Appurtenances" means operational infrastructure

      of the appropriate type and scale for economic

      commercial storage and distribution, and other similar

      handling of feedstock,   fuels,   and other products of

      biofuel processing facilities.

          "Biofuel processing facility" means a facility

      that produces liquid or gaseous fuels from organic

      sources such as biomass crops,     agricultural residues,

      and oil crops, including palm, canola, soybean, and

      waste cooking oils; grease;   food wastes; and animal

      residues and wastes that can be used to generate

      energy;

17)   Agricultural—energy facilities, including

      appurtenances necessary for an agricultural—energy

      enterprise; provided that the primary activity of the

      agricultural—energy enterprise is agricultural

      activity.   To be considered the primary activity of an

      agricultural—energy enterprise,     the total acreage

      devoted to agricultural activity shall be not less

      than ninety per cent of the total acreage of the

      agricultural—energy enterprise.      The agricultural-
      energy facility shall be limited to lands owned,

      leased,   licensed,   or operated by the entity conducting

      the agricultural activity.

          As used in this paragraph:

          "Agricultural activity" means any activity

      described in paragraphs (1) to (3) of this subsection.

          "Agricultural—energy enterprise" means an

      enterprise that integrally incorporates an

      agricultural activity with an agricultural—energy

      facility.

          "Agricultural—energy facility" means a facility

      that generates, stores, or distributes renewable

      energy as defined in section 269-91 or renewable fuel

      including electrical or thermal energy or liquid or

      gaseous fuels from products of agricultural activities

      from agricultural lands located in the State.

          "Appurtenances" means operational infrastructure

      of the appropriate type and scale for the economic

      commercial generation,     storage, distribution,   and

      other similar handling of energy,     including equipment,

      feedstock,   fuels,   and other products of agricultural-

      energy facilities;

18)   Construction and operation of wireless communication

      antennas; provided that, for the purposes of this
      paragraph,   "wireless communication antenna" means

      communications equipment that is either freestanding

      or placed upon or attached to an already existing

      structure and that transmits and receives

      electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of

      all types of wireless communications services;

      provided further that nothing in this paragraph shall

      be construed to permit the construction of any new

      structure that is not deemed a permitted use under

      this subsection;

19)   Agricultural education programs conducted on a farming

      operation as defined in section 165-2, for the

      education and participation of the general public;

      provided that the agricultural education programs are

      accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural

      use of the parcels or lots on which the agricultural

      education programs are to occur and do not interfere

      with surrounding farm operations.    For the purposes of

      this section,   "agricultural education programs" means

      activities or events designed to promote knowledge and

      understanding of agricultural activities and practices

      conducted on a farming operation as defined in section

      165-2;
    (20)   Solar energy facilities that do not occupy more than

                  ten per cent of the acreage of the parcel,    or

                  twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser, gr

                  that have been granted a special use permit

                  pursuant to section 205-6; provided that the area

                  occupied by the solar energy facilities is also

                  made available for compatible agricultural

                  activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty

                  per cent below the fair market rent for

                  comparable properties.     For the purposes of this

                  subparagraph,    "agricultural activities" means the

                  activities described in paragraphs (1) to (3);

                  and provided further that the solar energy

                  facilities shall be decommissioned and removed

                  within twelve months of the conclusion of

                  operation; and

                  Provided that this use shall not be permitted on

                       lands with soil classified by the land study

                       bureau's detailed land classification as

                       overall    (master) productivity rating class

                       A; orm”

     SECTION 4.     Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed

and stricken.     New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 5.     This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
blue ¢ e.lsa9.s2t                                                          iii‘                         F
                            HOUSE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
                              March 13, 2014, 9:30 A.M., Room 312
                                  (Testimony is 3 pages long)

         TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 2658 SD3, SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS

Chair Wooley, Vice-Chair Onishi, and members of the committee:

The Blue Planet Foundation supports SB 2658, allowing the dual use of solar energy generation
with farming or ranching on agricultural lands with Land Study Bureau ratings of B & C. We
believe passage of this measure will enable greater amounts of low-cost, clean, indigenous
energy to power our islands, while simultaneously preserving and expanding the opportunity to
provide local food and other agricultural products.

However. Blue Planet suggests that the bill should be amended to more closely match the
language found in the current draft of the companion bill. HB 2203 HD2. The language in HB
2203 provides a transparent process for evaluating dual use of land for solar and agricultural
activities, and provides that “the area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also made
available for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty percent below
the fair market rent for comparable properties . . .

This policy is timely and necessary to expand the amount of affordable
renewable energy

Solar energy is currently a bright spot in Hawai‘i’s progress toward energy independence, with
increasing amounts of affordable renewable solar powering our lifestyles and economy. The
cost of solar energy equipment has dropped some 50% over the past four years, making it more
affordable than oil-fired electricity generation. In fact, in responses to an invitation from Hawaiian
Electric Company last year for utility scale renewable projects fitting certain criteria, the
proposed electricity prices from projects (which were mostly solar) averaged 15.8 cents per
kilowatt-hour—far below the 23 to 25 cents per kilowatt-hour for oil-fired generation. These
proposed photovoltaic farms can provide the lowest cost solar energy currently available, and
those savings are shared with all ratepayers—not just those who can access solar on their own
rooftop. Further, when we shift our energy dollars away from foreign oil and to local clean
energy sources, those dollars circulate in Hawai‘i‘s economy to the benefit of everyone.

                                     info@blueplanelfoundution.org
    55 Merchant Street 17'“ Floor - Honolulu, Howoi‘l 96813 ~ 808-954-6142 ~ blueplonetfoundotionorg
Solar energy has widespread support and is typically easier to site than other forms of
renewable energy, such as wind and geothermal. A recent poll of Hawai‘i residents conducted
by the Pacific Resource Partnership found that solar has broad acceptance and support, with
96% of respondents in favor of solar. On O‘ahu in particular, much of the available land is more
suitable for solar energy than wind. Solar energy‘s low profile, silent operation, and lack of
significant moving parts make it less likely to encounter community concerns than other clean
energy sources.

The timing of SB 2658 is critical to provide the opportunity for projects to come online that will
make use of the existing 30% federal tax credit for solar—further lowering costs to ratepayers.
This 30% federal credit expires at the end of 2016 and it is unlikely to be renewed. This
measure will help clear the path for some projects to be built before the credit’s expiration,
saving ratepayers hundreds of millions over the life of the project. Allowing solar projects to
proceed on class B & C lands without having to obtain a special use permit will help to enable
timely construction so ratepayers can enjoy the benefits of low-cost renewable energy.



This policy is limited in scope and contains provisions to protect—and
increase—farming

This measure contains a number of provisions to protect the long-term value and possible uses
of farmland.

First, the measure requires that the land be made available for concurrent agricultural activities.
This dual use of the agricultural lands—which may include the growing of some crops or grazing
of |ivest0ck—provides double value from land that is likely currently unused. Further, energy
generation can improve the viability of land for agriculture by providing infrastructure and
subsidizing land costs for complementary agricultural uses. Revenue from the solar operations
can help make farming operations pencil out tor the entire agricultural operation.

Second, SB 2658 requires that the solar facilities be removed at the end of their operation. This
ensures that the farmland can be later used for other agricultural purposes at the end of the
solar facilities operations. Since solar farms have a relatively small footprint (when compared to
other operations or urban uses), the use of the land fora solar farm is really a form of land
banking where the land is essentially protected for later use.

Third, this policy enables solar projects (with co-existing ag operations) to proceed without
seeking a change in zoning. The land remains as agriculture and will remain similarly protected
at the end of the solar facilities operations.


Blue Plonet Foundation                                                                       Page 2
Finally, SB 2658 only relates to agricultural lands with LSB classifications of B & C—it does not
include class A lands, the most productive and valuable farmlands.

Blue Planet believes that SB 2658 is an appropriate approach to support both energy and food
sustainability. The legislature previously found that allowing solar energy facilities within the
agricultural district furthers and is consistent with the purposes, standards, and criteria of uses
within agricultural lands, and that renewable energy facilities increase both the State's energy
self-sufficiency and food security. Many of the LSB class B & C agricultural lands currently are
not being farmed. Because of the requirements in this measure, SB 2658 will likely increase the
acreage of ag lands that are actively being farmed or ranched, while providing timely access to
harvest the low-cost, indigenous, renewable solar energy to power our islands.




Blue Planet Foundation                                                                      Page 3
onishi2-Micah-Seth

From:                               Luann Casey <|uann@tinroofranch.org>
Sent:                               Tuesday, March 11,2014 5:51 PM
To:                                 AG Rtestimony
Subject:                            Testimony in support of bill SB12658 SD 3

Follow Up Flag:                     Follow up
Flag Status:                        Completed




        From: Luann Casey <luann@tinroofranch.org>
        Date: March 11, 2014 11:33:48 PM EDT
        T0: "AGRtestim0ny@capitol.hawaii.com“ <AGRtestimony@capito1.hawaii.com>
        Subject: Testimony in support of bill S.B.2658 SD 3



                  From: Luann Casey <luann@tinroofranch.org>
              Date: March 11, 2014 10:02:04 PM EDT
              T0: "AGRtestimonv@eapital.hawaii.gov " <AGRtestimonv@capital.haWaii.g0v>
                  Subject: Testimony in support of bill S.B.2658 SD 3

                  Dear Committee,
                  This is Tin Roof Ranch's testimony in support of SB 2658 SD3 for the hearing on
                  Thursday March 13 @ 0930 am.
                  Sincerely Luann & Gary
                  Tin Roof Ranch
                  Hale‘iWa


                  Representative Jessica Wooley, Chair
                  House Committee on Agriculture
                  Hawaii State Legislature
                  State Capitol
              415 S. Beretania Street
              Honolulu, HI 96813

                  TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SENATE BILL 2658 SD3 — RELATING TO
                  SOLAR ENERGY

                  Dear Chair Wooley and members of the House Committee on Agriculture,

                  We continue to support efforts to provide an incentive for large agricultural
                  landowners to open up more land on Oahu for sheep fanning. We believe S.B.
                  2658 SD3 is a Way to achieve that goal. As We have testiﬁed previously, the solar
              energy operation could help to subsidize segments of the sheep farming
                                                             1
operation including lease rent, fencing and water production making fanning
more cost-effective for the farmer. We like that the current version
mentions below market lease rents.

Making more agricultural land affordable for sheep farming will help to meet the
high demand for lamb on Oahu and on the neighbor islands with sheep raised
locally. The demand for locally-grown lamb is so great it is not possible for our
small farming operation to keep up with orders.

Having renewable energy and sheep coexist on agriculture land creates a
model for sustainable living and practices and this bill would make that possible.

We respectfully request that you approve S.B. 2658 SD3 as a show of support
for renewable energy andsheep farming.

Aloha,
Luann Casey and Gary Gunder
Tin Roof Ranch
Hale‘iwa, HI


Sent from my iPad




                                         2
