                             SB 2658
Measure
                RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.
Title:
Report Title:   Solar Energy; Agricultural Land
                Requires that solar facilities on agricultural lands with an overall
                productivity rating of class B or C occupy up to thirty, rather than ten,
                per cent of the acreage of the parcel or two or more adjacent parcels
                having met the applicable county requirements for the joint development
Description:    or joint lot use of those parcels; provided that the area occupied by the
                solar facilities in excess of twenty acres shall only be made available for
                agricultural activities compatible with the solar energy facilities. Requires
                that solar energy facilities be removed from the land within twelve
                months when the facilities are no longer in operation.
                                                                                                                            NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                                                        GOVERNOR

                         DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS,                                                                                  RICHARD C. LIM
                                                                                                                                         DIRECTOR
                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM                                                                     MARY ALICE EVANS
                                                                                                                                  DEPUTY DIRECTOR

                        No. 1 Capitol District BuJJdlng, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813   Telephone:    (808) 586-2355
                        Malling Address: P.0. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                       Fax:          (808) 586-2377
                        Web site: www.hawail.gov/dbedt

                                                 Statement of
                                            RICHARD C. LIM
                                                  Director
                         Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                                  before the
                       SENATE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
                                                     And
                                             AGRICULTURE
                                                    Thursday, February 6, 2014
                                                              3:30PM
                                               State Capitol, Conference Room 225
                                                    in consideration of
                                                         SB 2658
                                              RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.

                Chairs Gabbard and Nishihara, Vice Chairs Ruderman and Kouchi, and Members of the
         Committee.
                The Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) supports
         the intent of SB 2658, which would permit solar energy facilities on class B or C agricultural
         lands, provided the solar energy facility does not occupy more than 30% of the acreage of the
         parcel(s), and the area occupied by the solar facility is made available for compatible agricultural
         activities. The measure also requires that solar energy facilities be removed within twelve (12)
         months of the conclusion of the operation.
                Our state Energy Policy seeks to make the best use of Hawaii's land and resources by
         balancing technical, economic, environmental, and cultural considerations. DBEDT respectfully
         suggests that thoughtful clarification of the following provisions could help achieve this balance:
            •   Page 2, lines 19-21, and page 15, lines 5-7: In regards to "made available for agricultural
                activities that are compatible with the solar energy facilities," more clarity on what this
                constitutes could help ensure that the will of the Legislature is accurately interpreted and
                implemented.
                DBEDT supports the mandated decommissioning and removal of solar energy facilities
         within twelve (12) months of the conclusion of the operation.




SB2658 SB2658_BED_02-06-14_ENE-AGL_Approved Fina!ENE/AGL
       We defer to the appropriate agencies regarding whether a State Special Use Permit (SUP)
should be required prior to placing solar energy facilities on agricultural lands.
       Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments.




SB2658 SB2658_BED_02-06-14_ENE-AGL_Approved FinalENE/AGL                             Page 2
                                                                                                                                   DANIEL 0RODENKER
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                                                                                                                      Executive Officer
     Governor
                                                                                                                                Bert K. Saruwatari
 SHAN S. TSUTSUI                                                                                                                       Planner
Lieutenant Governor                                                                                                         SCOTT A.K. DERRICKSON AICP
                                                                                                                                       Planner
  RICHARD LIM                                                                                                                      RILEY K. HAKODA
     Director                                                                                                                          Chief Clerk
                                              LAND USE COMMISSION                                                                    FRED A. TALON
MARY ALICE EVANS
                                      Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism                                        Drafting Technician
  Deputy Director
                                                                  State of Hawai'i




                                                      Statement of
                                                 Daniel E. Orodenker
                                                   Executive Officer
                                                 Land Use Commission
                                                        Before the
                                     Senate Committee on Energy and Environment
                                                           and
                                               Committee on Agriculture
                                                   February 6, 2014
                                                         3:30 PM
                                          State Capitol, Conference Room 225

                                                        In consideration of
                                                             SB 2658
                                                   RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

           Chairs Gabbard and Nishihara, Vice Chairs Ruderman and Kouchi, and
       members of the Committees on Energy and Environment; and Agriculture:

              The Land Use Commission takes no position with regard to the policy
       considerations raised by this measure. We do, however, offer the following comments
       regarding SB 2658 that seeks to make utility scale solar energy facilties a permissible
       use within the State Agricultural District on lands classified by the Land Study Bureau
       (LSB) as class B and C.

       We would recommend that the measure be modified to require that solar energy
       facilities proposed for LSB class A, B, or C lands go through the State Special Permit
       process. This process, along with any specific limitations on parcel percentage (%) or
       acreage the Legislature may require, can insure that an open public forum is used to
       balance competing uses on our best agricultural lands and identify the parties
       responsible for implementing and enforcing any conditions of approval.

                    Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this matter.




     235 SOUTH BERETANIASTREET •   SUITE.406 •   HONO!.tJ!.. U, HAWAl'I 96813. TEL (808) 587-3822. Fax (808) 587-3827• EMAIL: Juc@dbedt.hawall.gov
                                          Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawail 96804
                                                                                                                   NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                                                GOVERNOR
               OFFICE OF PLANNING                                                                                       JESSE K. SOUKI
               STATE OF HAWAII                                                                                                   DIRECTOR
                                                                                                                       OFFICE OF PLANNING

              235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813                        Telephone:               (808) 587-2846
              Mailing Address: P .0. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                    Fax:               (808) 587-2824
                                                                                                        Web:    http://plannlng.hawaiJ.gov/



                                            Statement of
                                        JESSE K. SOUI<I
                                    Director, Office of Planning
                    Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                              before the
                  SENATE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
                                                 AND
                          SENATE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
                                    Thursday, February 6, 2014
                                               3:30 PM
                                State Capitol, Conference Room 225

                                           in consideration of
                                                SB 2658
                                     RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.


         Chairs Gabbard and Nishihara, Vice Chairs Ruderman and Kouchi, and Members of the
Senate Committees on Energy and Environment and Water and Agriculture.

         Senate Bill 2658 amends the State Land Use Law at Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
§§ 205-2 and 205-4.5, to allow "solar energy facilities" within the State Agricultural Land Use
District 1 on soils rated by the Land Study Bureau's Overall Productivity Rating (LSB) as "B" and
"C."2




1
  See HRS § 205-2 ("There shall be four major land use districts in which all lands in the State shall be placed:
urban, rural, agricultural, and conservation." As of November 12, 2013, approximately 49% of lands in the state are
in the Conservation District and 46% is in the Agricultural District.)

2
  See Land Study Bureau (LSB) Detailed Land Classification, Office of Planning, at
http://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/gis/data/lsb.pdf(The Land Study Bureau of the University of Hawaii prepared an
inventory and evaluation of the State's land resources during the 1960's and 1970's. The Bureau grouped all lands in
the State, except those in the urban district, into homogeneous units of land types; described their condition and
environment; rated the land on its over-all quality in terms of agricultural productivity; appraised its performance for
selected alternative crops; and delineated the various land types and groupings based on soil properties and
productive capabilities. A five-class productivity rating system was developed with "A" representing the class of
highest productivity and "E" the lowest. Ratings were developed for both over-all productivity, and for specific
crops. HRS Chapter 205 uses over-all productivity ratings.).
          HRS § 205-2 currently allows solar energy facilities. However, this amendment would
expand the land coverage of solar energy facilities from 10 percent or 20 acres (whichever is
lesser) to 30 percent of the acreage of the parcel. These statutory provisions would continue to
prohibit solar energy facilities on LSB "A" lands within the State Agricultural District.

          The Hawaii State Plan, passed by the legislature in 1978 and subsequently amended,,
promotes both agriculture and the promotion and development ofrenewable energy for current
                           3
and future generations. As the Committee balances these complex, often competing policy
objectives, we provide the following comments for your consideration:

      •   Statewide, LSB soil productivity ratings of lands within the State Agricultural District
          are distributed as follows:
              o     3.1 %, LSB "A"
              o     6.2%, LSB "B"
              o     14.9%, LSB "C"
              o     24.9%, LSB "D"
              o     50.9%, LSB "E"
      •   The counties and the State have not completed the process of identifying important
          agricultural lands (IAL) to the State of Hawaii. The intent of the IAL law is to
          "conser[ve] the State's agricultural land resource base and assur[e] the long-term
                                                                       4
          availability of agricultural lands for agricultural use[.]" The IAL law, passed in 2005,
          implements Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawaii State Constitution, which directs the
          State to "conserve and protect agricultural lands, promote diversified agriculture, increase
          agricultural self-sufficiency and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands."
      •   Allowing non-agricultural uses in the State Agricultural District may contribute to the
          impermanence syndrome, whereby agricultural use declines due to farmers'
          disinvestment in their farm operations in anticipation of development. This has been




3
 See HRS§§ 226-7 and 226-18 (relating to the State's "Objectives and policies for the economy-agriculture" and
"Objectives and policies for facility systems-energy," respectively).
4
    HRS § 205-41.

SB2658_BED_OP_02-06- l 4_ENE-AGL                     -2-
        observed to occur where competing uses are allowed in areas designed for agricultural
        uses. 5
    •   The list of non-agricultural uses on LSB "B" and "C" lands has grown over time.
        Currently, HRS § 205-2 allows the following non-agricultural uses: wind generated
        energy production; biofuel production; limited solar energy facilities; wind machines and
        wind farms; small-scale meteorological, air quality, noise, and other scientific and
        environmental data collection and monitoring facilities; open area recreational facilities;
        and geothermal resources exploration and geothermal resources development. The list of
        non-food related uses is longer still.
    •   The State Special Permit under HRS § 205-6 grants counties the authority to allow
        "certain unusual and reasonable uses within agricultural and rural districts other than
        those for which the district is classified[.]" In other words, the Special Permit process
        allows uses in the State Agricultural District that are not agricultural uses or related to
        agricultural uses on a case-by-case basis. Although we do not advocate for allowing non-
        agricultural uses within the State Agricultural District, this established process allows
        counties to review non-agricultural uses to mitigate impacts on the State Agricultural
        District. As HRS §§ 205-2 and 205-4.5 are currently drafted, Special Permits are not
        allowed for solar energy facilities on (1) LSB "A" lands, or (2) LSB "B" and "C" lands
        for more than 10 acres or 20 percent ofa parcel (whichever is lesser).

        Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure.




5
  Impermanence Syndrome -Have you got it?, Rutgers, at http://njsustainingfarms.rutgers.edu/farmlandissues.html
(last visited, Feb. 3, 2014).

SB2658_BED_OP_02-06- I 4_ENE-AGL                      -3-
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                                                                       SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
    Governor                                                                      Chairperson, Board of Agriculture




                                                State of Hawaii
                                      DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                           1428 South King Street
                                        Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512
                                   Phone: (808) 973-9600 FAX: (808) 973-9613




                           TESTIMONY OF              scon
                                              E. ENRIGHT
                         CHAIRPERSON, BOARD OF AGRICULTURE

      BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT, AND
                              AGRICULTURE
                        THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2014
                                 3:30 P.M.
                                 Room 225
                           SENATE BILL NO. 2658
                        RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY


   Chairpersons Gabbard and Nishihara and Members of the Committees:


           Thank you for the opportunity to testify on Senate Bill No. 2658. The Department
   of Agriculture supports the concept of energy as a complement to agriculture.
   Renewable energy development is essential to Hawaii's energy security; however, it
   should be promoted and implemented in a manner that protects prime agricultural land
   that is fundamental to agricultural production and food security.


           According to Office of Planning statistics, about 75 percent of the 1.9 million-acre
   Agricultural District has "D" or "E" ratings. We strongly believe that these poorer-quality
   agricultural lands be considered first for siting solar energy facilities. Existing State law
   does not impose limits on the acreage of "D" and "E" rated lands that can be used for
   solar energy facilities. On the other hand, "B" and "C" rated agricultural lands comprise
   21 percent of Hawaii's agricultural lands, have fair to good capacity for intensive
   agricultural production, and are more likely to be considered and designated as
   Important Agricultural Lands.


           Thank you for the opportunity to present our testimony.
                                                                                  A
Directors

Jody Allione                         TESTIMONY OF WARREN BOLLMEIER ON BEHALF OF THE
Silver Ridge                           HAWAII RENEWABLE ENERGY ALLIANCE BEFORE THE
                                    SENATE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRIONMENT AND
Joe Bolvin
Hawaii Gas                                            AGRICULTURE

Kelly King
                                                  SB2658, RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY
Pacific Biodiesel
                                                                 February 6, 2014
Warren S. Bollmeier II
WSB-Hawaii
                           Chairs Gabbard and Nishihara, Vice-Chairs Ruderman and Kouchi, and members
                           of the Committees, I am Warren Bollmeier, testifying on behalf of the Hawaii
                           Renewable Energy Alliance ("HREA''). HREA is an industry-based, nonprofit
                           corporation in Hawaii established in 1995. Our mission is to support, through
                           education and advocacy, the use of renewables for a sustainable, energy-efficient,
                           environmentally-friendly, economically- sound future for Hawaii. One of our goals
                           is to support appropriate policy changes in state and local government, the Public
                           Utilities Commission and the electric utilities to encourage increased use of
                           renewables in Hawaii.
                           The purposes of SB2658 are to: (1) require that solar facilities on agricultural lands
                           with an overall productivity rating of class B or C occupy up to thirty, rather than
                           ten, per cent of the acreage of the parcel or two or more adjacent parcels having
                           met the applicable county requirements for the joint development or joint lot use of
                           those parcels; provided that the area occupied by the solar facilities in excess of
                           twenty acres shall only be made available for agricultural activities compatible with
                           the solar energy facilities, and (ii) require that solar energy facilities be removed
                           from the land within twelve months when the facilities are no longer in operation.
                           HREA supports this measure with the following comments and recommendations:
                               1) Comments. The intent of the measure clear, as the measure:
                                   a) would promote the concept of dual use of Class B & C agricultural
                                      lands for agricultural activities and solar energy facilities.
                                   b) represents a creative approach to making the best use of available
                                      resources to meet Hawaii's clean energy goals and support a strong
                                      agricultural industry, i.e., this is at the heart of increasing both our Food
                                      and Energy Security.
                                   c) does not propose a permanent use of the land for solar, e.g., this
                                      measure requires the removal of the solar energy facilities at the
                                      conclusion of operation and restoration of the site to its pre-solar facility
                                      condition.
                               2) Recommendations: We recommend that you pass this measure out.

                           Mahalo for this opportun~y to testify.




46-01·0 Konane Place #3816, Kaneohe HI 9674,l • 'i-vww.http://ha\-vaiircne\.vahleenergy.org • p: 808.24-7,7753 • \.vsb@)lava.uet
The Pacific Resource
 PARTNERSHIP

    ~fl!
    ~_;,-


                                          Testimony of Cindy McMillan
                                         The Pacific Resource Partnership

                                  Senate Committee on Energy and Environment
                                          Senator Mike Gabbard, Chair
                                    Senator Russell E. Ruderman, Vice Chair

                                         Senate Committee on Agriculture
                                       Senator Clarence K. Nishihara, Chair
                                       Senator Ronald D. Kouchi, Vice Chair

                                        SB 2658 - Relating to Solar Energy
                                           Thursday, February 6, 2014
                                                    3:30PM
                                              Conference Room 225



     Dear Chairs Gabbard, Nishihara and Vice Chairs Ruderman, Kouchi and members of the committees,

     The Pacific Resource Partnership (PRP) is a labor-management consortium representing over 240
     signatory contractors and the Hawaii Regional Council of Carpenters.

     PRP supports SB 2658, Relating to Solar Energy, which requires that solar facilities on agricultural
     lands with an overall productivity rating of class B or C occupy up to thirty percent of the acreage of the
     parcel or two or more adjacent parcels having met the applicable county requirements for the joint
     development or joint lot use of those parcels; provided that the area occupied by the solar facilities in
     excess of twenty acres shall only be made available for agricultural activities compatible with the solar
     energy facilities. This measure also requires that solar energy facilities be removed from the land within
     twelve months when the facilities are no longer in operation.

     Hawaii imports most of our energy and most of our food. SB 2658 will allow solar energy facilities to
     be built on marginal agricultural lands which will provide beneficial effects for Hawaii's economy,
     environment, and energy security. Revenue generated .from solar "farms" can support agricultural uses
     by subsidizing land leases, providing infrastructure and/or providing energy for water.

     The State of Hawaii's goal is to meet 70% of our energy needs by 2030 through energy efficiency and
     renewable energy. In order to meet this goal, we must be creative in the widespread installation of green
     energy infrastructure equipment.


                   1100 Alakea Street• Alakea Corporate Tower, 4<h Floor• Honolulu, HI 96813
                         Tel (808) 528-5557 • Fax (808) 528-0421 • www.prp-hawaii.com
February 6, 2014
Testimony supporting SB 2658 Relating to Solar Energy
Page2



PRP respectfully asks for your favorable consideration of SB 2658 to demonstrate our commitment to a
sustainable community in Hawaii.
blue

                   SENATE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
                        SENATE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
                              February 6, 2014, 3:30 P.M.
                                      Room 225
                             (Testimony is 3 pages long)

            TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 2658, SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS



Chairs Gabbard and Nishihara and members of the committees:

The Blue Planet Foundation supports SB 2658, allowing the dual use of solar energy generation
with farming or ranching on agricultural lands with Land Study Bureau ratings of B & C. We
believe passage of this measure will enable greater amounts of low-cost, clean, indigenous
energy to power our islands while preserving and expanding the opportunity to provide local
food and other agricultural products.



This policy is timely and necessary to expand the amount of
affordable renewable energy

Solar energy is currently a bright spot in Hawaii's progress toward energy independence, with
increasing amounts of affordable renewable solar powering our lifestyles and economy. The
cost of solar energy equipment has dropped some 50% over the past four years, making it more
affordable than oil-fired electricity generation. In fact, in responses to an invitation from
Hawaiian Electric Company last year for utility scale renewable projects fitting certain criteria,
the proposed electricity prices from projects (which were mostly solar) averaged 15.8 cents per
kilowatt-hour-far below the 23 to 25 cents per kilowatt-hour for oil-fired generation. These
proposed larger photovoltaic farms-the others that are currently in operation-provide the
lowest cost solar energy, and those savings are shared with all ratepayers-not just those who
can access solar on their own. Further, when we shift our energy dollars away from foreign oil
and to local clean energy sources, those dollars circulate in Hawai'i's economy to the benefit of
everyone.

Solar energy has widespread support and is typically easier to site than other forms of
renewable energy, such as wind and geothermal. A recent poll of Hawai'i residents conducted

                                      lnfo@blueplanelfoundallon.org
    55 Merchant Street 171" Floor • Honolulu, Hawai'I 96813 • 808-954-6142 • blueplanetfoundation.org
by the Pacific Resource Partnership found that solar has broad acceptance and support, with
96% of respondents in favor of solar. On O'ahu in particular, much of the available land is more
suitable for solar energy than wind. Solar energy's low profile, silent operation, and lack of
significant moving parts make it less likely to encounter community resistance than other clean
energy sources.


The timing of SB 2658 is critical to provide the opportunity for projects to come online that will
make use of the existing 30% federal tax credit for solar-further lowering costs to ratepayers.
This 30% federal credit expires at the end of 2016 and it is unlikely to be renewed. This
measure will help clear the path for some projects to be built before the credit's expiration,
saving ratepayers hundreds of millions over the life of the project Allowing solar projects to
proceed on class B & C lands without having to obtain a special use permit will help to enable
timely construction so ratepayers can enjoy the benefits of low-cost renewable energy.



This policy is limited in scope and contains provisions to protect-and
increase-farming

This measure contains a number of provisions to protect the long-term value and possible uses
of farmland.

First, the measure requires that the land be made available for concurrent agricultural activities
(page 2, lines 17 - 21: "provided that the area occupied by the solar energy facilities in excess of
twenty acres shall only be made available for agricultural activities that are compatible with the
solar energy facilities ... "). This dual use of the agricultural lands-which may include the
growing of some crops or grazing of livestock-provides double value from land that is likely
currently unused. Further, energy generation can improve the viability of land for agriculture by
providing infrastructure and subsidizing land costs for complementary agricultural uses.
Revenue from the solar operations can help make farming operations pencil out for the entire
agricultural operation.

Second, SB 2658 requires that the solar facilities be removed at the end of their operation.
Specifically, "the solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned and removed within twelve
months of the conclusion of operation ... " (page 2, line 21 to page 3, line 2). This ensures that
the farmland can be later used for other agricultural purposes at the end of the solar facilities
operations. Since solar farms have a relatively small footprint (when compared to other
operations or urban uses}, the use of the land for a solar farm is really a form of land banking
where the land is essentially protected for later use.




Blue Planet Foundation                                                                        Page 2
Third, this policy enables solar projects (with co-existing ag operations) to proceed without
seeking a change in zoning. The land remains as agriculture and will remain similarly protected
at the end of the solar facilities operations.


Finally, SB 2658 only relates to agricultural lands with LSB classifications of B & C-it does not
include class A lands, the most productive and valuable farmlands.


Blue Planet believes that SB 2658 is an appropriate approach to support both energy and food
sustainability. The legislature previously found that allowing solar energy facilities within the
agricultural district furthers and is consistent with the purposes, standards, and criteria of uses
within agricultural lands, and that renewable energy facilities increase both the State's energy
self-sufficiency and food security. Many of the LSB class B & C agricultural lands currently are
not being farmed. Because of the requirements in this measure, SB 2658 will likely increase the
acreage of ag lands that are actively being farmed or ranched, while providing timely access to
harvest the low-cost, indigenous, renewable solar energy to power our islands.


SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS


Blue Planet suggests the following amendments to SB 2658.


Replacing page 2, lines 13 - 21, with the following:


        \'twenty acres of land, whichever is lesser (7], unless the area
       occupied by the solar energy facil,ities is also made available
        for agricultural activities as defined in paragraphs (1) to (3);
       provided further that the"


Mahalo for the opportunity to testify.




Blue Planet Foundation                                                                         Page3
Sen. Mike Gabbard, Chair
Sen. Russell Rudennan, Vice Chair
Senate Committee on Energy and Environment
Sen. Clarence Nishihara, Chair
Sen. Ronald Kouchi, Vice Chair
Senate Committee on Agriculture
Members of the Senate Committees on Energy and Environment and Agriculture
Hawaii State Legislature
State Capitol
415 S. Beretania Street
Honolulu, ill 96813

TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SENATE BILL 2658 -RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Dear Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Vice Chair Rudennan, Vice Chair Kouchi and mWlbers of the Senate Ccmmittees on Energy and
Environment and Agriculture,

We own and operate Tin Roof Ranch, an ewironrnentally-friendly, organic, and sustainable frum located on the North Sh:ire ofO 'ahu
in beautiful Haleiwa. Tin Roof Ranch produces organic, free range chickens and eggs and other organic pKJduce for purcha:;e at local
fanners' market.

We also raise sheep and lambs that we sell to local butchers, stores and restaurants. Demand for lamb and sheep products is so high we
cannot keep up with the requests and many times we have to tum down offers to buy our lamb and sheep iroducts.

We support S.B. 2658 because it will provide an incentive for large agricultural landowners to open up rrore land on O'ahu for sheep
fanning. The solar energy operation could also help to subsidize segments of the sheep funning operation including lease ren~ fencing
and water production making faming more cost-effective for the fanner.

Sheep fanning needs large tracts of land to be successful because sheep forage in herds withinblocks of pasture and then are mewed
through cross fencing to other sectons of the land to allow for regrowth of grass.

Because we pride ourselves on rmning a farm that utilizes sustainable practices, we also like the idea that oor sheep operations would
coexist with renewable energy andour sheep could help ~ith grmE maintenance for the solarpanels.

We respectfully request that you approve S.B. 2658 as a show of support for renewable energy and sheep farming.

Aloha,
Luann & Gary Gunder
Tin Roof Ranch
Haleiwa, Ha\vaii
                                          TESTIMONY OF
                      CRYSTAL KUA, DIRECTOR OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS - HAWAl'I
                                    FIRST WIND SOLAR GROUP
                                           BEFORE THE
               SENATE COMMITIEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT AND AGRICULTURE
                                         February 6, 2014
                                            3:30 p.m.
                                 Hawai'i State Capitol Room 225

                 TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF S.B. 2658 - RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Aloha Chair Gabbard, Chair Nishihara, Vice Chair Ruderman, Vice Chair Kouchi and members of the
Senate Committees on Energy and Environment and Agriculture,

Maha lo for this opportunity to testify in support of S.B. 2658 with amendments.

First Wind develops, finances, builds and operates utility-scale renewable energy projects throughout
the United States and is the largest producer of clean energy in Hawai'i with 150 megawatts generated
by our four wind projects on O'ahu and Maui.

In 2013, First Wind formed the First Wind Solar Group to explore potential development opportunities
near the company's wind projects in the Northeast, the West and Hawai'i.

In Hawai'i, First Wind is developing four utility-scale solar projects on O'ahu -two in Mililani, one in
Waiawa and one adjacent to our wind farm in Kawailoa - for a total of 132 megawatts of new
renewable energy. These projects will produce enough energy to:
    •  Power the equivalent of 40,000 homes on O'ahu.
    • Save O'ahu residents approximately $400 million over the 20-year life of the projects compared
       to Hawaiian Electric Company's current avoided cost of energy, if the projects are completed
       before the sunset of the solar federal tax credits in 2016.
    • Avoid using 500,000 barrels of oil a year.

Both the Waiawa and Kawailoa projects are being proposed on agricultural land with a class B soil rating.
These locations provide the optimum conditions to set up solar panels - relatively flat terrain with
significant solar energy potential.

Currently, HRS Chapter 205 limits solar energy projects on class Band C agricultural land to 20 acres. In
order to be financially viable and achieve the kind of clean energy production and cost-savings described
earlier, utility-scale solar facilities will take up more than 20 acres. Our Waiawa project is proposed for
228 acres and Kawailoa is planned for 327 acres.

First Wind understands and is sensitive to the recent public conversations surrounding the use of
agricultural land which is why First Wind supports S.B. 2658.
First Wind Testimony Before
Senate Committees on Energy and Environment and Agriculture
February 6, 2014
Page 2



This bill will allow for solar projects on tracts of Band C agricultural land larger than 20 acres if the
project also makes the land available for compatible agricultural activity. For First Wind, one leading
contender for an agricultural activity that is proven and compatible with solar operations is sheep
farming, which iS utilized on solar farms in Europe and on the mainland U.S. but we are also open to
other recommendations for a compatible agricultural activity.

We see this dual use of the land as a win for renewable energy, a win for local agriculture, and a win for
Hawai 'i residents for the following reasons:
   • The solar project could help provide affordable pasture land and infrastructure (e.g. fencing and
        roads) for the farmer or rancher, lowering costs and helping to promote local agribusiness.
   • Sheep grazing could provide a sustainable way to manage vegetation, keeping the grass and
        weeds from shading the solar panels; and
   • The combined use could provide local residents with both lower-cost clean energy and locally-
        raised agricultural products.

Because of recent comments we received from local farmers, ranchers and the different agencies with
jurisdiction over HRS Chapter 205, we are requesting the bill be amended to add that below-market
lease rent also be made available.

For all these reasons, we respectfully request that the committee approve S.B. 2658 with the suggested
amendments.

Maha lo.



S.B. 2658- PROPOSED AMENDMENT
... or iR tRe alterRative, of two or more adjacent parcels having met the applicable county requirements
for the joint development or joint lot use of those parcels; provided that the area occupied by the solar
energy facilities in excess of twenty acres shall ooly also be made available for compatible agricultural
activities at a lease rate that is below market rent for similar properties tRat are esFR~atisle witR tRe
sslar eRergy faeilities; provided further that the solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned and
removed within twelve months of the conclusion of operation;
As used in this paragraph. "agricultural activities" means activities described in paragraphs (1) to (3).
582658
Submitted on: 2/4/2014
Testimony for ENE/AGL on Feb 6, 2014 15:30PM in Conference Room 225


                           Organization
