               ,/---L_                                                                                                                   NEIL ABERCROMBIE
                                                                                                                                                     GOVERNOR
           '
                         "-Z.»     DE                        E                    BU          N
   .                      § ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM                                                                                     R|CHAR3R(é.C

                         1%                                                                                                                    DEPUTY DIRECTOR
                                                   ’
       \          , g ’\ __.1. '   No . 1 Capitol District B uilding, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, H8W8ll 96813   Telephone:    (B08) 586-2355
       X                  K’ ’
                        K-',§      Mailing Address: F‘.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                                        Fax:          (ans) 58672377
                          "'       Web site: www.hawaii.gov/dbedt


                                                      Statement of
                                                  RICHARD C. LIM
                                                       Director
                              Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
                                                       before the
                       HOUSE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                          And
                                                HOUSE COMMITTEE ON WATER & LAND
                                                                 Tuesday, March 25, 2014
                                                                          8:30 a.m
                                                           State Capitol, Conference Room 325
                                                                         in consideration of
                                                                        SB 2658, SD3, HD1
                                                         RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.

                         Chairs Lee and Evans, Vice Chairs Thielen and Lowen, and Members of the Committees.
                         The Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) supports
               the intent of SB 2658, SD3, HDl, which permits solar energy facilities on Land Study Bureau
               (LSB) Class B or C agricultural lands in excess of 10% of the parcel acreage or 20 acres,
               whichever is lesser, ifa State Special Use Permit (SUP) is obtained and the area occupied by the
               solar energy facilities is also made available for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate
               at least 50% below market value. The measure also requires that solar energy facilities that
               obtain a SUP be removed within twelve (l2) months of the conclusion of the operation.
                         Our state Energy Policy seeks to make the best use of Hawaii’s land and resources by
               balancing technical, economic, environmental, and cultural considerations. DBEDT supports the
               advancement of renewable energy development that beneﬁts and encourages on-site agricultural
               activities, and the mandated removal of such development at the end of its operational lifetime.
                         We support the amendment that a SUP should be required prior to placing solar energy
               facilities on agricultural lands in excess of the allowed limits. We also support the Ofﬁce of
               Planning’s comments on the need to balance the complex and often competing policy objectives
               promoting both agriculture and renewable energy for current and future generations.
                         Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments.



SB2658_SD3_I-ID]_BED_03-25-l4_EEP WAL_FINAL
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                              ,5;-7'; ~ Q 5 §;;*~t€,/                   SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
    Governor                                                                      Chairperson, Board of Agriculture
                                                     , ,‘
                                                   ﬁg“
                                                  ~21 g.-Q                              KEN H. KAKESAKO
                                             PE}                    *-sir
                                                                   \-
                                                                                     Deputy to the Chairperson

                                                 State of Hawaii
                                     DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                           1428 South King Street
                                        Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-2512
                                  Phone: (808)973-9600 FAX: (808)973-9613




                            TESTIMONY OF SCOTT E. ENRIGHT
                          CHAIRPERSON, BOARD OF AGRICULTURE

         BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
                      PROTECTION, AND WATER AND LAND
                          TUESDAY, MARCH 25, 2014
                                  8:30 A.M.
                                  Room 325

                   SENATE BILL NO. 2658, SENATE DRAFT 3, HOUSE DRAFT 1
                               RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

   Chairpersons Lee and Evans and Members of the Committees:


           Thank you for the opportunity to testify on Senate Bill No. 2658, House Draft 1.
   The Department of Agriculture supports the concept of solar energy facilities that are
   coexistent with agricultural activities and provides comments on this bill.


           According to Office of Planning statistics, about 75 percent of the 1.9 million-acre
   Agricultural District has “D” or “E” ratings. We strongly believe that these poorer-quality
   agricultural lands be considered first for siting solar energy facilities. Existing State law
   does not impose acreage limits or require related agricultural activity on “D“ and “E”
   rated lands used for solar energy facilities. On the other hand, “B” and “C” rated
   agricultural lands comprise 21 percent of Hawaii’s agricultural lands, have fair to good
   capacity for intensive agricultural production, and are more likely to be considered and
   designated as Important Agricultural Lands.

           Thank you for the opportunity to present our testimony.
1» 3
                                   OFFICE OF PLANNING
                                   STATE OF HAWAII                                                                              OFFICE or PLANNlNG
                                   235 South Beretania Street, 6th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813             Telephonei             (808) 587-2846
   ‘ [E "              f\          Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804                          Fax:             (808) 587-2824
               “W i"
       ‘(Q70                                                                                                      Web:    http://planmng.hawaii.gov/



                                                                           Statement of
                                                  LEO R. ASUNCION
                                            Acting Director, Ofﬁce of Planning
                                                        before the
                            HOUSE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                          AND
                                      HOUSE COMMITTEE ON WATER AND LAND

                                                                 Tuesday, March 25, 2014
                                                                          8:30 AM
                                                           State Capitol, Conference Room 325

                                                               in consideration of
                                                               SB 2658 SD3 HD1
                                                         RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.


                             Chairs Lee and Evans, Vice Chairs Thielen and Lowen, and Members of the House
                Committees on Energy and Environmental Protection and Water and Land.

                             The Office of Planning respectfully offers the following comments on Senate Bill 2658,
                SD 3, HD1, which amends the State Land Use Law at Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 205-2
                and 205-4.5, to allow “solar energy facilities” within the State Agricultural Land Use District on
                soils rated by the Land Study Bureau’s (LSB) Overall Productivity Rating as “B” and “C.”
                             HRS § 205-2 and HRS § 205-4.5 currently allow solar energy facilities in the State
                Agricultural District, with certain restrictions. This bill would do the following:
                             (1)      expand the land coverage of solar energy facilities greater than ten percent of the
                                      acreage of the parcel or twenty acres of land, whichever is less, to an unrestricted
                                      amount of acreage with a Special Use Permit; and
                             (2)      require that a Special Use Permit not be granted for the facility unless the area
                                      occupied by the solar energy facility is also made available for compatible
                                      agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least ﬁfty percent below the fair
                                      market rent for comparable properties.
        The statutory provisions would continue to prohibit solar energy facilities on LSB “A”
lands within the State Agricultural District.
        The Hawaii State Plan, passed by the legislature in 1978 and subsequently amended,
promotes both agriculture and the development of renewable energy for current and future
generations. As the Committee balances these complex and often competing policy objectives,
we provide the following comments for your consideration:

    1. Statewide, LSBs soil productivity ratings of lands within the State Agricultural District
        are distributed as follows:
            a. 3.1%, LSB “A”
            b.   6.2%, LSB “B”

            c.   14.9%, LSB “C”
            d. 24.9%, LSB “D”
            e. 50.9%, LSB “E”
        The current statutory allowances of solar energy facilities on agricultural lands
        (prohibited on A soils, permitted on B and C soils up to 10% or 20 acres whichever is
        less) in HRS §§ 205-2 and 205-4.5 are appropriate given the limited amount of A and B
        lands in the State of Hawaii. Within the State Agricultural District, only 3.1% (56,000
        acres) are rated as A, and only 6.2% (1 14,000 acres) are rated as B. Unless planned for
        urban growth by the county, these highly rated lands should remain available for
        agricultural production in the interests of agricultural food security and self-sufficiency.
    2. The counties and the State have not completed the process of identifying important
        agricultural lands (IAL) to the State of Hawaii. The intent of the IAL law is to
        “conser[ve] the State’s agricultural land resource base and assur[e] the long-term
        availability of agricultural lands for agricultural use[.]” The IAL law, passed in Z005,
        implements Article XI, Section 3, of the Hawaii State Constitution, which directs the
        State to “conserve and protect agricultural lands, promote diversiﬁed agriculture, increase
        agricultural self-sufficiency and assure the availability of agriculturally suitable lands.”
    3. Allowing non-agricultural uses in the State Agricultural District may contribute to the
        impermanence syndrome, whereby agricultural uses decline due to farmers’



SB2658SD3HD1_BED-OP_03-25-14_EEP-WAL             - 2 -
        disinvestment in their farm operations in anticipation of development. This has been
        observed to occur where competing uses are allowed in areas designed for agricultural
        uses.
        The list of non-agricultural uses on class B or C agricultural lands has grown over time.
        Currently, HRS § 205-2 allows the following non-agricultural uses: wind generated
        energy production; biofuel production; limited solar energy facilities; wind machines and
        wind fanns; small-scale meteorological, air quality, noise, and other scientiﬁc and
        environmental data collection and monitoring facilities; open area recreational facilities;
        and geothermal resources exploration and geothermal resources development. The list of
        non-food related uses is longer still.
        This amendment requires the area occupied by solar energy facilities be made available
        for compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least ﬁfty percent below fair
        market rent for comparable properties. Clarity on What “compatible agricultural
        activities” and “comparable properties” constitute would be beneficial for appropriate
        interpretation of the provision.


        Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure.




SB2658SD3HD1_BED-OP_03-25-14_EEP-WAL              - 3 -
                                                                                                                                          DANIEL ORODENKER
NEIL ABERCROMBIE                                                                                                                             Executive Ofﬁccr
     Governor
                                                                                ,»~/;’=.:Q~“*~>»
                                                                               ,’ 4 M,      st,‘ >.                                       Bert K. Saruwatari
 SHAN S. Tsursui                                                                          \
                                                                            [Y W~ ~ Pg .‘V ~ It   ,1, K                                           Planner
                                                                               t      1 X           X K
Lieutenant Govemor                                                                                                                  Scorr A.K. DERRICKSON AICP
                                                                                                                                                  Planner
  RICHARD LIM                                                                                                                             RILEY K. HAKODA
       Director                                                                                                                               ChiefClerk
                                                   LAND USE COMMISSION                                                                       FRED A. TALON
MARY A|.|cE EVANS                          Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism
  Dcputy Director                                                                                                                           Drafting Technician
                                                                            State of Hawai‘i




                                                                     Statement of
                                                                  Daniel E. Orodenker
                                                                   Executive Officer
                                                                 Land Use Commission
                                                                       Before the
                                                                 House Committees on
                                                   Energy and Environmental Protection
                                                                            and
                                                                       Water and Land
                                                                            March 25, 2014
                                                                     8:30 AM
                                                      State Capitol, Conference Room 325

                                                               In consideration of
                                                              SB 2658 SD3 HD1
                                                         RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

      Chairs Lee and Evans, Vice Chairs Thielen and Lowen, and members of the
  Committees on Energy and Environmental Protection and Water and Land.

         The Land Use Commission takes no position with regard to the policy considerations
  raised by this measure. We do, however, offer the following comments regarding SB 2658
  SD3 HD1 that seeks to make utility scale solar energy facilties a permissible use within the
  State Agricultural District on lands classified by the Land Study Bureau (LSB) as class B and
  C.

  We believe the language currently contained in HD1 provides for a public process, a State
  Special Permit pursuant to section 205-6, that allows government agencies to balance
  competing uses on our best agricultural lands. In addition, we suggest inclusion of language
  that makes the enforcement of any conditions placed on such State Special Permits clear.

        We recommend amending the currently proposed language in the bill to also add a new
  subsection to section 205-6, to read:

               “(_g)      Anv other provision of the laws to the contrarv notwithstanding, the land use
              commission mav vacate, void, modifv or amend anigpecial permit if it reasonablv finds
              that there has been a failure to substantiallv conform with the conditions or
              requirements of the order qrantinq the special permit."


       Z35 SUUIH BEREI \\M §|Rl:|:l Q bUill:406 9 HO)\Ol_lJl.lJ, HAW/\l'l     96813 9 TEL (808) 5875822 9 Fax (808) 587—3827Q EMAIL; luc@dbedt.hawaii.gov
                                                Mailing Address: P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804
Page 2




         Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this matter
                               DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING
                       CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
                            650 SOUTH KING STREET. 7'" FLOOR ' HONOLULU. HAWAII 96813
                                     PHONE: (sea) vsasooo - FAX: (aoa)1es-0041
                        DEPT. WEB SITE: www.honoluludpg.org I CITY WEB S|TE1www.honolulu.gov



max CALDWELL                                             1
  MAYOR                                              x j_ ~,:,                                  csones |. ATTA, FAICP
                                                                                                     DIRECTOR
                                                     ' #5; Q
                                                    IT

                                                                                               ARTHUR D. CHALLACOMBE
                                                    rt                                            DEPUTY DIRECTOR



                                                 March 25, 2014

   The Honorable Chris Lee, Chair
    and Members of the Committee on Energy &
    Environmental Protection
   The Honorable Cindy Evans, Chair
    and Members of the Committee on Water & Land
   Hawaii State House of Representatives
   Hawaii State Capitol
   415 South Beretania Street
   Honolulu, Hawaii 96813

    Dear Chairs Lee and Evans and Committee Members:
                                SUBJECT: Senate Bill No. 2658, SD2, HD1
                                         Relating to Solar Energy
           The Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) supports the intent of Senate Bill
    No. 2658, SD2, HD1, which addresses solar energy facilities in the State agricultural district. It
   further deﬁnes conditions under which these facilities, including offering agricultural uses with
   rents at half the fair market rate.
          We support th_e use of some types of lands in the State agricultural district for uses such
   as photovoltaic farms. However, we do not believe that State law should itemize conditions that
   are so speciﬁc that similar types of conditions could not be considered simply because of
   omission in State law. Recent experience also shows that complete dependence on Land
    Study Bureau (LSB) land use classiﬁcations can lead to unreasonable results.
           Thus, as mentioned in our testimony on Senate Bill No. 2775, SD1, HD1, LSB
    classiﬁcations should be dropped as a screening mechanism that cannot be appealed. Also,
    the seemingly arbitrary percentages on use oocupancies should be dropped. We believe that
    Sec. 205-6, HRS should be amended to reﬂect performance standards, rather than delineating
    speciﬁc circumstances, as suggested below:

            “g) Solar energy facilities that are not accessory to a permitted use may be permitted by
    special permit on lands designated by the LSB‘s detailed land classification as overall (master)
    productivity rating as Class A or B, provided the following are met:

           (1)     Use of the land for solar energy generation does not question the viability of the
                   agricultural district classiﬁcation of the land;
           (2)     The lands, either occupied by the solar energy facility, on remainder lands within
                   the same property, shall be used for agricultural purposes, if only for livestock
                   grazing, as conﬁrmed by annual photo documentation;
The Honorable Chris Lee, Chair
 and Members of the Committee on Energy 8-
 Environmental Protection
The Honorable Cindy Evans, Chair
 and Members of the Committee on Water & Land
Hawaii State House of Representatives
Re: Senate Bill No. 2658, SD2, HD1
March 25, 2014
Page 2


       (3)     It can be demonstrated that lands can be returned to in-ground crop cultivation or
               livestock production once solar energy generation ceases;
       (4)     Facilities do not negatively impact adjoining agricultural uses;
       (5)     Facilities are appropriately buffered or screened to reduce visual impacts to a
               rural landscape, particularly as viewed from public highways."
       Given the above amendment, lands designated by the LSB‘s detailed land classification
as overall (master) productivity rating Class C, D, E, or unclassified, shall be allowed solar
energy facilities as pemtitted uses, and do not need special permits. Further, this strategy
should be considered an interim response to balancing energy needs with agricultural needs
until Important Agricultural Lands have been designated, and more comprehensive approaches
can be studied to better deﬁne the balance between these two important public policies.
       Lastly, the City cannot administer the restriction on lease rents. We do not monitor fair
market lease rents. Therefore, we ask that this condition be deleted, or assigned to another
agency for administration.
       Thank you for the opportunity to testify.

                                             Very truly yours.

                                             ,y,m;/ I @222‘
                                              George I. Atta, FAICP
                                              Director


G|A:cl
SB2658SD3HD1-ks
                                                                                                         R
                                                                                       allllunk             lls



                                             TESTIMONY OF
                         CRYSTAL KUA, DIRECTOR OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS — HAWAl’l
                                       FIRST WIND SOLAR GROUP
                                              BEFORE THE
                                        HOUSE COMMITTEES ON
                             ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION &
                                           WATER AND LAND

                  TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF S.B. 2658 SD3 HD1 WITH AMENDMENTS

Aloha Chairs Lee and Evans, and members of the House Committees on Energy and Environmental
Protection & Water and Land,

Mahalo for this opportunity to provide testimony in support of S.B. 2658 SD3 HD1 with amendments.

This bill allows for utility-scale solar projects on B- and C-rated agricultural land larger than 20 acres i_f
the project also makes the land available for compatible agricultural activity.

This dual use ofthe land is a win for renewable energy, a win for local agriculture, and a win for Hawai'i
residents for the following reasons:
    I The solar project could help provide affordable pasture land and infrastructure (e.g. fencing and
        roads) for the farmer or rancher, lowering costs and helping to promote local agribusiness.
    Q Sheep grazing could provide a sustainable way to manage vegetation, keeping the grass and
        weeds from shading the solar panels; and
    1 The combined use could provide local residents with both lower-cost clean energy and locally-
        raised agricultural products.

We are requesting an HD2 with the attached amendments. The proposed HD2 is designed to clarify
that the bill provides a process for transparency and accountability through the special use permit for
solar energy projects larger than 20 acres. The bill also provides a benefit to agriculture with the
availability of lease rent at least 50% below market value. The suggested amendments reflect the
assistance we have received throughout the legislative process from the Land Use Commission and the
Sierra Club.

For all these reasons, we respectfully request that the committees approve S.B. 2658 SD3 HD1 with the
proposed amendments.

Mahalo.
THE SENATE                                      2658
TWENTY-SEVENTH                    S ' B ' N O ' s.o. 3
LEGISLATURE, 2014                               H.D. 2
STATE o|= HAWAII




                 A BILL FOR AN ACT
RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY.



BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:


SECTION 1.     The purpose of this Act is to enable the

complementary uses of utility scale solar energy generation and

local food production on agricultural land with an overall

productivity rating of class B or C.

     SECTION 2.     Section 205-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is

amended by amending subsection      (d)   to read as follows:

     "(d)    Agricultural districts shall include:

      (l)    Activities or uses as characterized by the cultivation

             of crops,   crops for bioenergy,   orchards,   forage,   and

             forestry;

      (2)    Farming activities or uses related to animal husbandry

             and game and fish propagation;
Aquaculture, which means the production of aquatic

plant and animal life within ponds and other bodies of

water;

Wind generated energy production for public, private,

and commercial use;

Biofuel production, as described in section

205—4.5(a)(l6),   for public, private,   and commercial

use;

Solar energy facilities; provided that:

(A)    This paragraph shall apply only to land with soil

       classified by the land study bureau's detailed

       land classification as overall (master)

       productivity rating class B, C,   D,   or E; and

For Section 205-2 (d)   (6)

 (B)   Solar energy facilities placed within land with

       soil classified as overall productivity rating

       class B or C shall not occupy more than ten per

       cent of the acreage of the parcel,     or twenty

       acres of land, whichever is lesser[+], unless a

       special use permit is granted pursuant to section

       205-6 and the area occupied by the solar energy

       facilities is also made available for compatible

       agricultural activities at a lease rate that is

       at least fifty per cent below the fair market
     rent for comparable properties; provided further

     that solar energy facilities for which a special

     use permit has been granted shall be

     decommissioned and removed within twelve months

     of the conclusion of operation.

For the purposes of this paragraph, "agricultural

activities" means the activities described in

paragraphs (l) to (3);

Bona fide agricultural services and uses that support

the agricultural activities of the fee or leasehold

owner of the property and accessory to any of the

above activities, regardless of whether conducted on

the same premises as the agricultural activities to

which they are accessory, including farm dwellings as

defined in section 205—4.5(a)(4),    employee housing,

farm buildings, mills, storage facilities, processing

facilities, photovoltaic, biogas,    and other small-

scale renewable energy systems producing energy solely

for use in the agricultural activities of the fee or

leasehold owner of the property,    agricultural—energy

facilities as defined in section 205—4.5(a)(l7),

vehicle and equipment storage areas, and plantation

community subdivisions as defined in section

205—4.5(a)(l2);
(8)   Wind machines and wind farms;

(9)   Small—scale meteorological,     air quality, noise,   and

      other scientific and environmental data collection and

      monitoring facilities occupying less than one—half

      acre of land; provided that these facilities shall not

      be used as or equipped for use as living quarters or

      dwellings;

10)   Agricultural parks;

11)   Agricultural tourism conducted on a working farm,       or a

      farming operation as defined in section l65—2, for the

      enjoyment,   education,   or involvement of visitors;

      provided that the agricultural tourism activity is

      accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural

      use and does not interfere with surrounding farm

      operations; and provided further that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that has adopted

      ordinances regulating agricultural tourism under

      section 205-5;

12    Agricultural tourism activities,     including overnight

      accommodations of twenty—one days or less,     for any one

      stay within a county; provided that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that includes at least

      three islands and has adopted ordinances regulating

      agricultural tourism activities pursuant to section
          205-5; provided further that the agricultural tourism

          activities coexist with a bona fide agricultural

          activity.    For the purposes of this paragraph,    "bona

          fide agricultural activity" means a farming operation

          as defined in section l65—2;

   (13)   Open area recreational facilities;

[+](l4)[+]Geothermal resources exploration and geothermal

          resources development, as defined under section 182-1;

          and

[+1(15)[+]Agricultural—based commercial operations, including:

          (A)   A roadside stand that is not an enclosed

                 structure, owned and operated by a producer for

                 the display and sale of agricultural products

                 grown in Hawaii and value—added products that

                 were produced using agricultural products grown

                 in Hawaii;

          (B)   Retail activities in an enclosed structure owned

                 and operated by a producer for the display and

                 sale of agricultural products grown in Hawaii,

                 value—added products that were produced using

                 agricultural products grown in Hawaii,    logo items

                 related to the producer's agricultural

                 operations,   and other food items; and
              (C)   A retail food establishment owned and operated by

                      a producer and permitted under       [+jtitle ll,[jj

                      chapter l2 of the rules of the department of

                      health that prepares and serves food at retail

                      using products grown in Hawaii and value—added

                      products that were produced using agricultural

                      products grown in Hawaii.

              The owner of an agricultural—based commercial

              operation shall certify, upon request of an officer or

              agent charged with enforcement of this chapter under

              section 205-12,      that the agricultural products

              displayed or sold by the operation meet the

              requirements of this paragraph.

Agricultural districts shall not include golf courses and golf driving

ranges, except as provided in section 205-4.5(d).          Agricultural

districts include areas that are not used for,          or that are not suited

to,   agricultural and ancillary activities by reason of topography,

soils,    and other related characteristics."

       SECTION 3.     Section 205-4.5,   Hawaii Revised Statutes,   is amended

by amending subsection      (a)   to read as follows:

       "(a)   Within the agricultural district,     all lands with soil

classified by the land study bureau's detailed land classification as

overall    (master)   productivity rating class A or B shall be restricted

to the following permitted uses:
Cultivation of crops,    including crops for bioenergy,

flowers, vegetables,    foliage,   fruits,   forage,   and

timber;

Game and fish propagation;

Raising of livestock,    including poultry, bees,       fish,

or other animal or aquatic life that are propagated

for economic or personal use;

Farm dwellings, employee housing, farm buildings, or

activities or uses related to farming and animal

husbandry.    "Farm dwelling", as used in this

paragraph, means a single-family dwelling located on

and used in connection with a farm, including clusters

of single-family farm dwellings permitted within

agricultural parks developed by the State, or where

agricultural activity provides income to the family

occupying the dwelling;

Public institutions and buildings that are necessary

for agricultural practices;

Public and private open area types of recreational

uses,   including day camps, picnic grounds, parks, and

riding stables, but not including dragstrips,

airports, drive-in theaters, golf courses, golf

driving ranges,   country clubs,    and overnight camps;
(7)   Public, private,    and quasi-public utility lines and

      roadways,    transformer stations,   communications

      equipment buildings,    solid waste transfer stations,

      major water storage tanks,    and appurtenant small

      buildings such as booster pumping stations, but not

      including offices or yards for equipment, material,

      vehicle storage,    repair or maintenance,   treatment

      plants, corporation yards, or other similar

      structures;

(8)   Retention, restoration, rehabilitation, or improvement

      of buildings or sites of historic or scenic interest;

(9)   Agricultural—based commercial operations as described

      in section    [+1205-2(d)(l5)[+];

10    Buildings and uses, including mills, storage, and

      processing facilities, maintenance facilities,

      photovoltaic, biogas, and other small—scale renewable

      energy systems producing energy solely for use in the

      agricultural activities of the fee or leasehold owner

      of the property,    and vehicle and equipment storage

      areas that are normally considered directly accessory

      to the above-mentioned uses and are permitted under

      section 205-2(d);

ll)   Agricultural parks;
12)   Plantation community subdivisions, which as used in

      this chapter means an established subdivision or

      cluster of employee housing,     community buildings,    and

      agricultural support buildings on land currently or

      formerly owned,   leased,   or operated by a sugar or

      pineapple plantation; provided that the existing

      structures may be used or rehabilitated for use,        and

      new employee housing and agricultural support

      buildings may be allowed on land within the

      subdivision as follows:

      (A)   The employee housing is occupied by employees or

             former employees of the plantation who have a

            property interest in the land;

      (B)   The employee housing units not owned by their

             occupants shall be rented or leased at affordable

             rates for agricultural workers; or

      (C)   The agricultural support buildings shall be rented

             or leased to agricultural business operators or

             agricultural support services;

13)   Agricultural tourism conducted on a working farm,        or a

      farming operation as defined in section 165-2,     for the

      enjoyment, education, or involvement of visitors;

      provided that the agricultural tourism activity is

      accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural
      use and does not interfere with surrounding farm

      operations; and provided further that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that has adopted

      ordinances regulating agricultural tourism under

      section 205-5;

14    Agricultural tourism activities, including overnight

      accommodations of twenty-one days or less,   for any one

      stay within a county; provided that this paragraph

      shall apply only to a county that includes at least

      three islands and has adopted ordinances regulating

      agricultural tourism activities pursuant to section

      205-5; provided further that the agricultural tourism

      activities coexist with a bona fide agricultural

      activity.   For the purposes of this paragraph, "bona

      fide agricultural activity" means a farming operation

      as defined in section 165-2;

15)   Wind energy facilities,   including the appurtenances

      associated with the production and transmission of

      wind generated energy; provided that the wind energy

      facilities and appurtenances are compatible with

      agriculture uses and cause minimal adverse impact on

      agricultural land;

16)   Biofuel processing facilities,   including the

      appurtenances associated with the production and
      refining of biofuels that is normally considered

      directly accessory and secondary to the growing of the

      energy feedstock; provided that biofuel processing

      facilities and appurtenances do not adversely impact

      agricultural land and other agricultural uses in the

      vicinity.

          For the purposes of this paragraph:

          "Appurtenances" means operational infrastructure

      of the appropriate type and scale for economic

      commercial storage and distribution, and other similar

      handling of feedstock,   fuels,   and other products of

      biofuel processing facilities.

          "Biofuel processing facility" means a facility

      that produces liquid or gaseous fuels from organic

      sources such as biomass crops,     agricultural residues,

      and oil crops, including palm, canola, soybean, and

      waste cooking oils; grease;   food wastes; and animal

      residues and wastes that can be used to generate

      energy;

17)   Agricultural—energy facilities,     including

      appurtenances necessary for an agricultural—energy

      enterprise; provided that the primary activity of the

      agricultural—energy enterprise is agricultural

      activity.   To be considered the primary activity of an
agricultural—energy enterprise,   the total acreage

devoted to agricultural activity shall be not less

than ninety per cent of the total acreage of the

agricultural—energy enterprise.     The agricultural-

energy facility shall be limited to lands owned,

leased, licensed, or operated by the entity conducting

the agricultural activity.

    As used in this paragraph:

    "Agricultural activity" means any activity

described in paragraphs (1) to (3) of this subsection.

    "Agricultural—energy enterprise" means an

enterprise that integrally incorporates an

agricultural activity with an agricultural—energy

facility.

    "Agricultural—energy facility" means a facility

that generates, stores, or distributes renewable

energy as defined in section 269-91 or renewable fuel

including electrical or thermal energy or liquid or

gaseous fuels from products of agricultural activities

from agricultural lands located in the State.

    "Appurtenances" means operational infrastructure

of the appropriate type and scale for the economic

commercial generation,   storage, distribution,   and

other similar handling of energy,    including equipment,
      feedstock,   fuels,   and other products of agricultural-

      energy facilities;

18    Construction and operation of wireless communication

      antennas; provided that,     for the purposes of this

      paragraph,   "wireless communication antenna" means

      communications equipment that is either freestanding

      or placed upon or attached to an already existing

      structure and that transmits and receives

      electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of

      all types of wireless communications services;

      provided further that nothing in this paragraph shall

      be construed to permit the construction of any new

      structure that is not deemed a permitted use under

      this subsection;

19)   Agricultural education programs conducted on a farming

      operation as defined in section 165-2, for the

      education and participation of the general public;

      provided that the agricultural education programs are

      accessory and secondary to the principal agricultural

      use of the parcels or lots on which the agricultural

      education programs are to occur and do not interfere

      with surrounding farm operations.      For the purposes of

      this section,   "agricultural education programs" means

      activities or events designed to promote knowledge and
       understanding of agricultural activities and practices

       conducted on a farming operation as defined in section

       165-2;

(20)   Solar energy facilities that do not occupy more than

       ten per cent of the acreage of the parcel,    or twenty

       acres of land, whichever is lesser[ ‘I-j, or for which:

       (A)   A special use permit is granted pursuant to

       section 205-6;   [previded—that—thie]

       (B)   The area occupied by the solar energy facilities

             is also made available for compatible

             agricultural activities at a lease rate that is

             at least fifty per cent below the fair market

             rent for comparable properties; and

       (C)   Solar energy facilities for which a special use

             permit has been granted shall be decommissioned

             and removed within twelve months of the

             conclusion of operation.

       This use shall not be permitted on lands with

             soil classified by the land study bureau's

             detailed land classification as overall   (master)

             productivity rating class A[+];

       For the purposes of this subparagraph, "agricultural

       activities" means the activities described in

       paragraphs (1) to (3); or
(2l)[+]Geothermal resources exploration and geothermal

     resources development,    as defined under section

     182-1."


SECTION 4.     Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed

and stricken.    New statutory material is underscored.

SECTION 5.     This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
                                        $1
Directors                          TESTIMONY OF WARREN BOLLMEIER ON BEHALF OF THE
Jody Allione
                                    HAWAII RENEWABLE ENERGY ALLIANCE BEFORE THE
Silver Ridge                   HOUSE COMMITTEES ON ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                  AND WATER & LAND
Joe Boivin
Hawaii Gas                                SB 2658 SD3 HD1, RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY
Kelly King                                                     March 25, 2014
Pacific Biodiesel
                         Chairs Lee and Evans, Vice-Chairs Thielen and Lowen and members of the
Warren S. Bollmeier ll   Committee, I am Warren Bollmeier, testifying on behalf of the Hawaii Renewable
WSB»Hawaii               Energy Alliance (“HREA”). HREA is an industry-based, nonprofit corporation in Hawaii
                         established in 1995. Our mission is to support, through education and advocacy, the
                         use of renewables for a sustainable, energy-efficient, environmentally-friendly,
                         economically- sound future for Hawaii. One of our goals is to support appropriate
                         policy changes in state and local government, the Public Utilities Commission and the
                         electric utilities to encourage increased use of renewables in Hawaii.

                         The purposes of SB 2658 SD3 HD1 are to: (i) require a special use permit for solar
                         energy facilities on class B or C land, (ii) require solar energy facilities placed within
                         land with soil classified as overall productivity rating class B or C to occupy not more
                         than thirty per cent of the acreage of the parcel, or twenty acres of land, whichever is
                         lesser, or in the alternative, of two or more adjacent parcels having met the applicable
                         county requirements for the joint development or joint lot use of those parcels, (iii)
                         require the area occupied by the solar energy facility to also be made available for
                         compatible agricultural activities at a lease rate that is at least fifty per cent below fair
                         market rent for comparable properties, (iv) require the area occupied by the solar
                         energy facility to also be made available for compatible agricultural activities, (v) define
                         "agricultural activities", (vi) require that solar energy facilities be decommissioned and
                         removed within twelve months of the conclusion of operation.

                         HREA supports this measure with the following comments and recommendations:

                             1) Comments. The intent of the measure clear, as the measure:

                                 a) would promote the concept of dual use of Class B & C agricultural lands
                                     for agricultural activities and solar energy facilities.
                                 b) represents a creative approach to making the best use of available
                                    resources to meet Hawaii’s clean energy goals and support a strong
                                    agricultural industry, i.e., this is at the heart of increasing both our Food
                                    and Energy Security.
                                 c) does not propose a permanent use of the land for solar, e.g., this
                                    measure requires the removal of the solar energy facilities at the
                                     conclusion of operation and restoration of the site to its pre-solar facility
                                     condition.
                             2) Recommendations: We recommend that you pass this measure out.

                         Mahalo for this opportunity to testify.

46-040 Konane Place #3816, Kaneohe HI 9674-4 v www.http://hawaiirenewableenergyprg v p: 808.247.7753 - wSb@1ava net
Representative Chris Lee, Chair
Representative Cindy Evans
House Committee on Energy and Environmental Protection
House Committee on Water and Land
Hawaii State Legislature
State Capitol
415 S. Beretania Street
Honolulu, HI 96813

TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SENATE BILL 2658 SD3 HDl — RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY

Dear Chair Lee, Chair Evans and members of the Committees,

We continue to support efforts to provide an incentive for large agricultural landowners to open up more
land on Oahu for sheep farming. We believe S.B. 2658 SD3 HDl is a way to achieve that goal. As we
have testiﬁed previously, the solar energy operation could help to subsidize segments of the sheep
farming operation including lease rent, fencing and water production making farming more cost-effective
for the farmer. We like that the current version mentions below market lease rents.

Making more agricultural land affordable for sheep farming will help to meet the high demand for lamb
on Oahu and on the neighbor islands with sheep raised locally. The demand for locally-grown lamb is so
great it is not possible for our small farming operation to keep up with orders.

Having renewable energy and sheep coexist on agriculture land creates a model for sustainable living and
practices and this bill would make that possible.

We respectfully request that you approve S.B. 2658 SD3 HDI as a show of support for renewable energy
and sheep farming.

Aloha,
Luann Casey and Gary Gunder
Tin Roof Ranch
Haleiwa, Hawaii
blue Q polggﬁt                                         4.*\

                                                                             Y?‘

          HOUSE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND EVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                   HOUSE COMMITTEE ON WATER AND LAND
                                March 25, 2014, 8:30 A.M., Room 325
                                    (Testimony is 3 pages long)

                        TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 2658 SD3 HD1

Chair Lee, Chair Evans, Vice Chair Thielen, Vice Chair Lowen, and committee members:

The Blue Planet Foundation supports SB 2658 DS3 HD1, allowing the dual use of solar energy
generation with farming or ranching on agricultural lands with Land Study Bureau ratings of B &
C. We believe that passage of this measure will enable greater amounts of low-cost, clean,
indigenous energy to power our islands, while simultaneously preserving and expanding the
opportunity to provide local food and other agricultural products.

This policy is timely and necessary to expand the amount of affordable
renewable energy

Solar energy is currently a bright spot in Hawai‘i‘s progress toward energy independence, with
increasing amounts of affordable renewable solar powering our lifestyles and economy. The
cost of solar energy equipment has dropped some 50% over the past four years, making it more
affordable than oil-fired electricity generation. In fact, in responses to an invitation from Hawaiian
Electric Company last year for utility scale renewable projects fitting certain criteria, the
proposed electricity prices from projects (which were mostly solar) averaged 15.8 cents per
kilowatt-hour—far below the 23 to 25 cents per kilowatt-hour for oil-fired generation. These
proposed photovoltaic farms can provide the lowest cost solar energy currently available, and
those savings are shared with all ratepayers—not just those who can access solar on their own
rooftop. Further, when we shift our energy dollars away from foreign oil and to local clean
energy sources, those dollars circulate in Hawai‘i‘s economy to the benefit of everyone.

Solar energy has widespread support and is typically easier to site than other forms of
renewable energy, such as wind and geothermal. A recent poll of Hawai‘i residents conducted
by the Pacific Resource Partnership found that solar has broad acceptance and support, with
96% of respondents in favor of solar. On O‘ahu in particular, much of the available land is more
suitable for solar energy than wind. Solar energy‘s low profile, silent operation, and lack of

                                      info@b|ueplaneIfoundofion.org
    55 Merchant Street 17'“ Floor - Honolulu, Howoi‘l 96813 - 808-954-6142 ~ bluep|onetfoun<:lotion.org
significant moving parts make it less likely to encounter community concerns than other clean
energy sources.

The timing of SB 2658 is critical to provide the opportunity for projects to come online that will
make use of the existing 30% federal tax credit for solar—further lowering costs to ratepayers.
This 30% federal credit expires at the end of 2016 and it is unlikely to be renewed. This
measure will help clear the path for some projects to be built before the credit’s expiration,
saving ratepayers hundreds of millions over the life of the project. Allowing solar projects to
proceed on class B & C lands without having to obtain a special use permit will help to enable
timely construction so ratepayers can enjoy the benefits of low-cost renewable energy.

This policy is limited in scope and contains provisions to protect—and
increase—farming

This measure contains a number of provisions to protect the long-term value and possible uses
of farmland.

First, the measure requires that the land be made available for concurrent agricultural activities.
This dual use of the agricultural |ands—which may include the growing of some crops or grazing
of livestock—provides double value from land that is likely currently unused. Further, energy
generation can improve the viability of land for agriculture by providing infrastructure and
subsidizing land costs for complementary agricultural uses. Revenue from the solar operations
can help make farming operations pencil out for the entire agricultural operation.

Second, SB 2658 requires that the solar facilities be removed at the end of their operation. This
ensures that the farmland can be later used for other agricultural purposes at the end of the
solar facilities operations. Since solar farms have a relatively small footprint (when compared to
other operations or urban uses), the use of the land for a solar farm is really a form of land
banking where the land is essentially protected for later use.

Third, this policy enables solar projects (with co-existing ag operations) to proceed without
seeking a change in zoning. The land remains as agriculture and will remain similarly protected
at the end of the solar facilities operations.

Finally, SB 2658 only relates to agricultural lands with LSB classifications of B & C—it does not
include class A lands, the most productive and valuable farmlands.

Blue Planet believes that SB 2658 is an appropriate approach to support both energy and food
sustainability. The legislature previously found that allowing solar energy facilities within the
agricultural district furthers and is consistent with the purposes, standards, and criteria of uses


Blue Plonet Foundation                                                                       Page 2
within agricultural lands, and that renewable energy facilities increase both the State's energy
self-sufficiency and food security. Many of the LSB class B & C agricultural lands currently are
not being farmed. Because of the requirements in this measure, SB 2658 will likely increase the
acreage of agricultural lands that are actively being farmed or ranched, while providing timely
access to harvest the low-cost, indigenous, renewable solar energy to power our islands.




Blue Plonet Foundotion                                                                    Poge 3
