                                      STAND. CON. REP. NO.    1r14_14
                                      Honolulu, Hawaii
                                                          2014

                                      RE:   S.B. No.   2658
                                            S.D. 3
                                            H.D. 1




Honorable Joseph N. Souki
Speaker, House of Representatives
Twenty-Seventh State Legislature
Regular Session of 2014
State of Hawaii

Sir:

     Your Committee on Agriculture,     to which was referred S.B. No.
2658, S.D. 3, entitled:

       “A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY,”

begs leave to report as follows:

     The purpose of this measure is to facilitate the
complementary uses of utility-scale solar energy generation and
local food production on agricultural land with an overall
productivity rating of class B or C.

      Specifically, the measure increases the maximum acreage that
solar energy facilities may occupy on agricultural lands with soil
classified as overall productivity rating class B or C from ten
per cent to thirty per cent of one parcel, or two or more adjacenE
parcels that meet county requirements for joint development;
provided that:

       (1)   A special use permit has been granted for the solar
             energy facilities;

       (2)   The area occupied by the solar energy facilities is also
             made available for compatible agricultural activities at
             a lease rate that is at least fifty per cent below the
             fair market rent for comparable properties; and



SB2658 HD1 J-{SCR LRB 14-1936-1.doc
                                    STAND. COM. REP. NO.   1114 -14
                                    Page 2


     (3)   The solar energy facilities shall be decommissioned and
           removed within twelve months of the conclusion of the
           operation.

      The Department of Business, Economic Development, and
Tourism, Hawaii Renewable Energy Alliance, First Wind Solar Group,
Blue Planet Foundation, and Tin Roof Ranch provided testimony in
support of this measure.   The Department of Agriculture, Office of
Planning, and Land Use Commission provided comments.

      Your Committee finds that competition for the use of Hawaii’s
valuable land for sustainable purposes necessitates the most
efficient and productive uses of land.    Your Committee believes
that, in limited circumstances and with specific conditions, the
promotion of agricultural activities and clean energy, two vital
requirements of sustainable living, will provide for more locally
grown agricultural products and allow the State to meet its clean
energy goals.   Your Committee further finds that this measure will
help to revitalize the agricultural industry and ultimately
provide for a cleaner and healthier environment.

     Your Committee has amended this measure by:

     (1)   Deleting the increase to the maximum amount of the
           acreage of the parcel of land that solar energy
           facilities placed within agricultural lands with soil
           classified as overall productivity rating class B or C
           may occupy;

     (2)   Deleting provisions relating to the placement of solar
           energy facilities on two adjacent parcels that meet
           county requirements for joint use;

     (3)   Specifying that solar energy facilities on agricultural
           lands with soil classified as overall productivity
           rating class B or C may occupy more than ten per cent of
           the acreage of the parcel or twenty acres of land,
           whichever is lesser, if a special use permit is granted,
           the area is made available for compatible agricultural
           activities at a reduced lease rate, and facilities are
           decommissioned and removed within twelve months of the
           conclusion of operation;

     (4)   Deleting the sunset date; and



SB2658 HD1 HSCR LRB l4—1936-1.doc
                                      STAND. COM.   REP. NO.   11’74_14
                                      Page3


      (5)   Making technical nonsubstantive changes for purposes of
            clarity, consistency, and style.

     As affirmed by the record of votes of the members of your
Committee on Agriculture that is attached to this report, your
Committee is in accord with the intent and purpose of S.B. No.
2658, S.D. 3, as amended herein, and recommends that it pass
Second Reading in the form attached hereto as S.B. No. 2658, S.D.
3, H.D. 1, and be referred to the Committees on Energy &
Environmental Protection and Water & Land.

                                      Respectfully submitted on
                                      behalf of the members of the
                                      Committee on Agriculture,




                                      J    ICA WOOLEY, Chai




SB2658 HD1 I-{SCR LRB 14-1936-1.doc
                                                         State of Hawaii                              I4SGR fl14’i~
                                                     House of Representatives
                                                  The Twenty-seventh Legislature

                              Record of Votes of the Committee on Agriculture

Bill/Resolution No.:                             Committee Referral:                          Date:
                 5~ S~3                           A~R. EE~/W~L
U The committee is reconsidering its previous decision on the measure.

The recommendation is to:         U Pass, unamended (as is)       ~iiss, with amendments (HD)            U Hold
                                  U Pass short form bill with }{D to recommit for future public hearing (recommit)


                 AGR Members                                       Ayes            Ayes (WR)            Nays            Excused

1.   WOOLEY, Jessica (C)


2.   ONISHI, Richard H.K. (VC)


3.   AWANA, Karen


4.   BROWER, Tom                                                    V
5.   CACHOLA, Romy M.


6.   CHOY, Isaac W.


7.   OHNO, Takashi


8.   TOKIOKA, James Kunane


9.   TSUJI, Clift


10. MATSUMOTO, Lauren Kealohilani


11. WARD, Gene




                    TOTAL (11)                                      11
The recommendation is:               ~                          U Not Adopted
                                     If joint referral,                               did not support recommendation.
                                                            committee acronym(s)

Vice Chair’s or designee’s signature:         ~~
Distribution: Original (White)   —   Committee            Duplicate (Yellow) — Chief Clerk’s Office     Duplicate (Pink) — HMSO
