                                     STAND. COM. REP. NO.        -14

                                    Honolulu, Hawaii
                                       Aptil 4         2014
                                                       .

                                    RE:    S.B. No. 2658
                                           S.D. 3
                                           H.D. 2




Honorable Joseph M. Souki
Speaker, House of Representatives
Twenty-Seventh State Legislature
Regular Session of 2014
State of Hawaii

Sir:

      Your Committees on Energy & Environmental Protection and
Water & Land, to which was referred S.B. No. 2658, S.D. 3, H.D. 1,
entitled:

       TTA BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY,

beg leave to report as follows:

      The purpose of this measure is to complement the uses of
utility scale solar energy generation and local food production on
agricultural land with an overall productivity rating of class B
or C even if percentage of acreage limits are exceeded, by
requiring a special use permit for the solar energy facility
which:

       (1)   Requires that the area occupied by the facility be made
             available for compatible agricultural activities at a
             lease rate that is at least fifty percent below fair
             market rent for comparable properties; and

       (2)   Requires that the facility be decommissioned and removed
             within twelve months of the conclusion of operations.

      The Department of Business, Economic Development, and
Tourism; Department of Planning and Permitting City and County of
Honolulu; Tin Roof Ranch; and Blue Planet Foundation supported
this measure. The Department of Agriculture; Office of Planning;

S32658 HD2 HSCR EEP-WAL HMS 2014-2944-1
                                    STAND. COM. REP. NO.   161   -14
                                    Page 2


Land Use Commission; First Wind Solar Group; and Hawaii Renewable
Energy Alliance commented on this measure.

      Your Committees note the concerns that were raised regarding
the competing uses on agricultural lands. Accordingly, your
Committees have amended this measure by additionally requiring,
with respect to special use permits required for solar energy
facilities exceeding percentage of acreage requirements on
agricultural land with an overall productivity rating of class B.
or C:

     (1)   That the applicant provide proof of financial security
           to decommission the facility to the satisfaction of the
           appropriate county planning commission prior to the date
           of commencement of commercial generation; and

     (2)   Decommissioning similar to that currently required under
           Hawaii law for wind.energy facilities, including
           decommissioning at owner expense, facility removal
           within twelve months of the conclusion of operations or
           the facility’s useful life, and restoration of the
           disturbed earth to substantially the same condition as
           prior to facility development.

     Your Committees have also made technical, nonsubstantive
amendments for clarity, consistency, and style.

     As affirmed by the records of votes of the members of your
Committees on Energy & Environmental Protection and Water & Land
that are attached to this report, your Committees are in accord
with the intent and purpose of S.B. No. 2658, S.D. 3, H.D. 1, as
amended herein, and recommend that it pass Third Reading in the
form attached hereto as S.B. No. 2658, S.D. 3, H.D. 2.

                                    Respectfully submitted on
                                    behalf of the members of the
                                    Committees on Energy &
                                    Environmental Protection and
                                    Water & Land,




CINDY EVANS, Chair                  CHRIS LEE, Chair


SB2658 HD2 HSCR EEP—WAL HMS 2014-2944-1
                                                      State of Hawaii
                                                  House of Representatives +ISCI            ~ I ~ ‘7~ 11.1
                                               The Twenty-seventh Legislature

             Record of Votes of the Committee on Energy & Environmental Protection
                                                                                                              I
Bill/Resolution No.:                          Committee Referral:                        Date:

     ~1~31~N
Li The committee is reconsidering its previous decision on the measure.

The recommendation is to:        U Pass, unamended (as is)          )≥~Pass, with amendments (HD)        Li Hold
                                 Li Pass short form bill with HI) to recommit for future public hearing (recommit)


                 EEP Members                                      Ayes          Ayes (WR)           Nays             Excused

1.   LEE, Chris (C)


2.   THIELEN, Cynthia (VC)                                                                        >(
3.   CULLEN, Ty J.K.


4.   EVANS, Cindy


5.   HANOHANO, Faye P.


6.   KAWAKAMI, Derek S.K.


7.   SAY, Calvin K.Y.


8.   NISHIMOTO, Scott Y.


9.   LOWEN, Nicole E.


10. FALE, Richard Lee




                   TOTAL (10)                                  -7                                   /
The recommendation is:           ~Adopted                   Li Not Adopted
                                 If joint referral,                              did not support recommendation.
                                                        committ    acronym(s)


Vice Chair’s or designee’s signature:     ~                          ,$‘~6~2’~~s.uC)


Distribution: Original (White) — Committee            Duplicate (Yellow) — Chief Clerks Office     Duplicate (Pink) — HMSO
                                                                                           I4SCR /57f-IL/
                                                          State of Hawaii
                                                      House of Representatives
                                              The Twenty-seventh Legislature


                            Record of Votes of the Committee on Water & Land

Bill/Resolution No.:                         Committee Referral:                           Date:
     ~                                       i\ER,EEP/wM_                                          3/Z7/i~-~
Li The committee is reconsidering its previous decision on the measure.

The recommendation is to:        Li Pass, unamended (as is)       W’Pass, with amendments (HD)          Li Hold
                                 Li Pass short form bill with HD to recommit for future public hearing (recommit)


                WAL Members                                     Ayes            Ayes (WR)            Nays           Excused

1.   EVANS, Cindy (C)


2.   LOWEN, Nicole E. (VC)


3.   CULLEN, Ty J.K.


4.   HANOHANO, Faye P.


5.   KAWAKAMI, Derek S.K.

6.   LEE, Chris


7.   SAY, Calvin K.Y.


8.   NISHIMOTO, Scott Y.                                                                                               ~




9.   FALE, Richard Lee


10. THIELEN, Cynthia                                                                                 ‘V




                   TOTAL (10)                                                                                        ~—z.
The recommendation is:           ~‘~Adopted                  Li Not Adopted
                                 If joint referral,                               did not support recommendation.
                                                         committee acronym(s)

Vice Chair’s or designee’s signatu~AA~                     F~ ~
Distribution: Original (White) — Committee             Duplicate (Yellow) — Chief Clerk’s Office     Duplicate (Pink) — HMSO
