                                      STAND. COM. REP. NO.
                                                             2217
                                      Honolulu, Hawaii
                                             FEB 1 2 2014
                                      RE :      S.B. No. 2658
                                                S.D. 1



Honorable Donna Mercado Kim
President of the Senate
Twenty-Seventh State Legislature
Regular Session of 2014
State of Hawaii

Madam :

     Your Committees on Energy and Environment and Agriculture, to
which was referred S.B. No. 2658 entitled:

      " A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY,"

beg leave to report as follows:

     The purpose and intent of this measure is to:

      (1) Require that solar energy facilities on agricultural
          lands with an overall productivity rating of class B or
          C occupy up to thirty, rather than ten, percent of the
          acreage of the parcel or two or more adjacent parcels
          having met certain county requirements; provided that
          the area occupied by the solar energy facilities in
          excess of twenty acres shall only be made available for
          agricultural activities compatible with the solar energy
          facilities; and

      (2) Require that solar energy facilities be removed from the
          land within twelve months when the facilities are no
          longer in operation.

     Your Committees received testimony in support of this measure
from the Hawaii Renewable Energy Alliance, The Pacific Resource
Partnership, Blue Planet Foundation, Tin Roof Ranch, First Wind
Solar Group, and one individual. Your Committees received
comments on this measure from the Department of Business, Economic
Development, and Tourism; Department of Agriculture; Land Use
Commission; and Office of Planning.
2014-1257 SSCR SMA.doc
                                        STAND. COM. REP. NO.
                                        Page 2                 2217

     Your Committees find that renewable energy development is
essential to Hawaii's energy security. Allowing solar energy
facilities within the agricultural district furthers and is
consistent with the purposes, standards, and criteria of uses
within agricultural lands, while increasing Hawaii's energy
self-sufficiency and food security.

      Your Committees have amended this measure by:

      (1) Clarifying that where the area occupied by a solar
          energy facility within an agricultural district with an
          overall productivity rating of class B or C is in excess
          of twenty acres, the area shall be made available for
          agricultural activities that are compatible with the
          solar energy facilities at a lease rate that is at least
          fifty percent below fair market rent for comparable
          properties; and

      (2) Making a technical, nonsubstantive amendment for the
          purposes of clarity and consistency.

     As affirmed by the records of votes of the members of your
Committees on Energy and Environment and Agriculture that are
attached to this report, your Committees are in accord with the
intent and purpose of S.B. No. 2658, as amended herein, and
rec,Qmmend that it pass Second Reading in the form attached hereto
as S.B. No. 2658, S.D. 1, and be referred to the Committee on
Water and Land.

                                   Respectfully submitted on
                                   behalf of the members of the
                                   Committees on Energy and


                    -   I   -
  L      L     %
CLARENCE K. NISHIHARA, Chair        MIKE GABB$RD, Chair




2014-1257 SSCR SMA.doc
                                             The Senate
                                      Twenty-Seventh Legislature
                                           State of Hawai'i

                                      Record of Votes
                            Committee on Energy and Environment
                                           ENE
Bill / Resolution No.:*              I C0rnmitte.e Referral:                I Date: J         i

                                                                                    I     1
  0The committee is reconsidering its previous decision on this measure.
        If so, then the previous decision was to:

The Recommendation is:                   I


  0 Pass, 231
          unamended $Pass,
              2
                                                  w;lmendments           0231
                                                                          Hold 0Recommit
                                                                             0    2313
                   Members                                  Aye      Aye (WR)           Nay        Excused
GABBARD, Mike (C)
RUDERMAN, Russell E. (VC)
CHUN OAKLAND, Suzanne


SLOM, Sam




           TOTAL
Recommendation:
                                             /             3                                       z
                                                                                Not Adopted

Chair's or Desi


Distribution:             Original                  Yellow              Pink               Goldenrod
                File with Committee Report       Clerks Office    Drafting Agency       Committee File Copy

                  *Only one measure per Record of Votes
                                                                                                      Revised: 11/19/12
                                                 The Senate
                                          Twenty-Seventh Legislature
                                               State of Hawai'i

                                            Record of Votes
                                         Committee on Agriculture
                                                  AGL
I Bill / Resolution No.:*                I Committee Referral:               I Date:


I 0         The committee is reconsidering its previous decision on this measure.

I           If so, then the previous decision was to:




                       Members                               Aye      Aye (WR)         Nay        Excused
    NISHIHARA, Clarence K. (C)                               /




                                                                                                        ~




                      TOTAL                                                                       u
    Recommendation:
                                       dAdopted                           u      Not Adopted

    Chair's or Designee's Sig


    Distribution:
                                   I
                               Original        1 " Yellow                Pink             Goldenrod
                    File with Committee Report    Clerk's Office   Drafting Agency     Committee File Copy

                      *Only one measure per Record of Votes
                                                                                                       Revised: 11/19/12
