                                                                   STAND. COM. REP. NO.

                                                                   Honolulu, Hawaii
                                                                                         abm
                                                                          FEB 2 8 2014
                                                                   RE :      S.B. No. 2658
                                                                             S.D. 2



Honorable Donna Mercado Kim
President of the Senate
Twenty-Seventh State Legislature
Regular Session of 2014
State of Hawaii

Madam :

     Your Committee on Water and Land, to which was referred S.B.
No. 2658, S.D. 1, entitled:

             "A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO SOLAR ENERGY,"

begs leave to report as follows:

     The purpose and intent of this measure is to enable the
complementary uses of utility scale solar energy generation and
local food production on agricultural land with an overall
productivity rating of class B or C, by:

              (1) Requiring that solar facilities on agricultural lands
                  with an overall productivity rating of class B or C
                  occupy up to thirty, rather than ten, percent of the
                  acreage of the parcel or two or more adjacent parcels
                  having met the applicable county requirements for the
                  joint development or joint lot use of those parcels;
                  provided that the area occupied by the solar facilities
                  in excess of twenty acres shall only be made available
                  for agricultural activities compatible with the solar
                  energy facilities at a lease rate that is at least fifty
                  percent below fair market rent for comparable
                  properties; and

              (2) Requiring that solar energy facilities be removed from
                  the land within twelve months when the facilities are no
                  longer in operation.


2014-1496 SSCR SMA.doc
I111li1ll1111111lI1III1111lllIllUI1 1 l1l1lAlI111l 111Il11111Il1
                                                                      STAND. COM. REP. NO.
                                                                      Page 2



     Your Committee received testimony in support of this measure
from the Department of Business, Economic Development, and
Tourism; Department of Agriculture; Blue Planet Foundation; First
Wind Solar Group; and two individuals. Your Committee received
comments on this measure from the Office of Planning and Land Use
Commission.

     Your Committee finds that the State's energy policy seeks to
make the best use of Hawaii's land and resources by balancing
technical, economic, environmental, and cultural considerations.
This measure supports the advancement of renewable energy
development that simultaneously benefits and encourages on-site
agricultural activities.

     Your Committee further finds that solar energy is currently a
bright spot in Hawaii's progress toward energy independence.
Increasing the amounts of affordable renewable solar energy will
power our lifestyles and economy. The dual use of the
agricultural lands as provided in this measure, which may include
the growing of crops or grazing of livestock, provides increased
value from land. Further, energy generation can improve the
viability of land for agriculture by providing infrastructure and
subsidizing land costs for complementary agricultural uses.

     Your Committee's utmost concern is to preserve the
agricultural u s e of prime agricultural land. As this measure
proposes the first actual combined use of agriculture and solar
energy, your Committee requests the Land Use Commission to build
in adequate conditions into the special use permit to ensure that
agricultural activities are genuinely compatible with solar energy
operations, as well as to protect against agricultural land being
used as a "gentleman'sfarm". The testimony on this measure was
unclear as to what happens to the solar facility if a sheep
farmer, for example, goes out of business in two years after the
special use permit is issued. Thus, your Committee believes that
this measure needs to be revisited after adequate time has elapsed
to evaluate its efficacy.

              Your Committee has amended this measure by:

               (1) Amending sections 205-2(d)(6)(B) and 205-4.5(a)(20),
                   Hawaii Revised Statutes, to require a special use permit
                   for the placement of solar energy facilities on class B
                   or C agricultural lands;

2014-1496 SSCR SMA.doc
1 1l 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 .1llllilllllllllIllllllIIll111llIlllllIIP'
                                        STAND. COM. REP. NO.
                                        Page 3



     (2) Deleting language in section 205-2 (d)(6)( B ) , Hawaii
         Revised Statutes, that would have increased the maximum
         portion of land that could be occupied by a solar energy
         facility placed on class B or C agricultural lands and
         deleting references to adjacent parcels and joint
         development;

     (3) Amending sections 205-2 (d)(6)( B ) and 205-4.5(a)(20),
         Hawaii Revised Statutes, to require the entire area,
         rather than an area in excess of twenty acres, occupied
         by a solar energy facility to be made available for
         compatible agricultural activities and to define
         "agricultural activities";

     (4) Amending section 205-4.5(a)(20), Hawaii Revised
         Statutes, by deleting the cap on the portion of land
         that can be occupied by a solar energy facility placed
         on class B agricultural lands and deleting references to
         adjacent parcels and joint development;

     (5) Adding a sunset date of July 1, 2020, to allow the
         Legislature to review the efficacy of the combined use
         of agriculture and solar energy on agricultural lands
         proposed by this measure; and

     (6) Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments for purposes
         of clarity and consistency.

     As affirmed by the record of votes of the members of your
Committee on Water and Land that is attached to this report, your
Committee is in accord with the intent and purpose of S . B .
No. 2658, S.D. 1, as amended herein, and recommends that it pass
Third Reading in the form attached hereto as S . B . No. 2658,
S.D. 2.

                                   Respectfully submitted on
                                   behalf of the members of the
                                   Committee on Water and Land,
                                                    n




                                   MALAMA SOLOM&,       Chair



2014-1496 SSCR SMA.doc
                                            The Senate
                                     Twenty-Seventh Legislature
                                          State of Hawai'i

                                        Record of Votes
                                   Committee on Water and Land
                                              WTL
Bill / Resolution NO.:*             I Committee Referral:                I Date:

  u     The committee is reconsidering its previous decision on this measure.
        If so, then the previous decision was to:

The Recommendation is:
  0 Pass, 2312
          unamended @Pass,                     with amendments
                                                   2311
                                                                            Hold
                                                                            2310
                                                                                    0Recommit
                                                                                       2313
                 Members
SOLOMON, Malama (C)
GALUTERIA, Brickwood (VC)
DELA CRUZ, Donovan M.
IHARA, Jr., Les
RUDERMAN, Russell E.
SHIMABUKURO, Maile S.L.                                   J
TANlGUCHl, Brian
THIELEN. Laura H.
SLOM, Sam




                TOTAL
Recommendation:
                               d    d      opted                      u      Not Adopted

Chair's or Designee's Signature:


Distribution:                                    Yellow              Pink             Goldenrod
                          mmittee Report      Clerk's Office   Drafting Agency     Committee File Copy

                *Only one measure per Record of Votes
                                                                                                 Revised: 07/01/13
